# Project 8 - Business Blog

### GOALS

Build a business blog using Bootstrap, which discusses a complex topic.


### Demonstrated Skills

Page Structure in HTML

* Header
* Main
* Footer
* Linked Stylesheets - Bootstrap & Custom CSS

HTML Elements

* Image
* Headings 1, 2
* Bullet List
* Paragraphs

Bootstrap CSS Classes

* Typography
* Components
* Grid Layout

Starting Template

* Use 
[Demo Template](https://github.com/Mark-Seaman/Mark-Seaman.github.io/blob/master/demo/week8/template.html)
as a starting point for your page.
* Set a dark color theme with "bg-dark" and "text-light" classes
* Use "rounded-circle" class on your image


### Business Blog

During this project you will create a business blog that discusses  a complex
issue that has social, economic, and political implications.

Select one of the current controversies:

* Response to Pandemic
* Long Term Stock Exchange
* Free Elections
* Immigration Reform
* Wealth Inequality
* Social Media and Extremism
* Social Justice Inequality
* Climate Change

We live in a day of extremism, when our ability to have a civil debate is at an
all-time low.  You will research an important topic to understand the social, 
economic, and political implications.

You will write a thoughtful article for your blog that presents a point of view 
and persuades others to adopt your view without resorting to slogans or clichés.

Discuss both sides of the debate (Pro and Con).  Create a great headline and three
subheadings: Social implications, Economic implications, Political implications, 
Conclusion.
Provide 100 words on each area.


### Web Page Requirements

* Page is published at "bacs200/blog.html"
* Use an embedded stylesheet for Bootstrap and Custom Styles
* Visually appeal:  Type, Color, Spacing, Alignment
* Looks good on phone - Responsive Web Design
* Create headline and four sub-headings
* Include one photo with text flowing around it
* Include all the text for the business requirements
* Use sound logic in your article
* Create a page that builds professional credibility

