# Project 12 - Professional Video


## STEPS

### Create a Business Video
* Create a script
* Record your video 
* You should produce around 3 minutes of video
* Repeat until you are satisfied


### Script for Video
* Introduce yourself
* Discuss your background
* Highlight your five greatest skills
* Tell what you can do for a prospective company


### Write the script
* Write an outline for a business article 
* Identify four main topics
* Create four subtopics for each main topic
* Use the 4x4 outline to draft the text for your video


### Record your video
* Use your script to record your video
* Repeat the recording until you are satisfied
* Produce 2-minutes of video


### Publish Video on YouTube
* Create a YouTube channel for Business video
* Upload your video and set the options
* Enable embedding on your video


### Publish your Webpage
* Create a page at "bacs200/video.html"
* Copy content from Project 8 or 9 to your page
* Create two Bootstrap cards (50% width) - video, info
* Add your script to the page in a Bootstrap card


### Business Content
* Embed your video to directly play from this page
* Provide a photo and author information 
* Make your page look professional (this is for your portfolio)
* Include references to other websites for further learning



## Project Details

### Practice with Video
* Create a few seconds of video as practice
* Next session we will 
    * set YouTube
    * start on a real video project


### Basic Recording
* **Record** - Use a phone to record a video
* **Upload** - Share to YouTube 
* **Publish** - Let everything default in YouTube
* **Play** - Visit your YouTube channel to play my video


### Create Video Page
* Use a page template to create a page "bacs200/video.html"
* In YouTube use menu "Copy Embed Video"
* Paste into your web page
* Create page with embedded YouTube video


### Set YouTube options
* Details 
* Title & Description
* Thumbnail
* Audience
* Visibility
* Comments
* Misc info


### YouTube Options
* Publish Video
    * Basic Recording steps will get a public YouTube video.
* Details. Find Channel and Video
    * Select Details
* Title & Description
    * I used the share to YouTube option to upload the video.
* Thumbnail
    * Select the image that shows in the initial view.
* Audience
    * "Not made for kids", and "Restrict to over 18" will stop ads from playing
* Visibility
    * "Unlisted" lets you use the video in a page without having it be part of your YouTube channel
    * "Public" makes it visible in your channel.


### More YouTube Options
* Comments
    * "Disable comments" or "Hold all comments for review" to prevent spam
* Misc info
    * Set "Recording Date", "License", "Category"
* Allow Embedding
    * Supports the "Copy Embed Code". 
    * Adjust the size for the iframe


### Video Edit
* Download
    * Save the file from YouTube onto the local computer.
* Import Video
    * Import the file into the video editing app.
* Delete Pauses
    * Find all the sections where the audio is undesirable. 
    * Delete those sections.
* Share to YouTube
    * Upload the new file to YouTube. 
    * This creates a new video that can be handled as before.



## REQUIREMENTS

* Page exists at "bacs200/video.html"
* Page contains a business video
* Professional look and feel
* Video plays from page
* Script is posted
* Business content is professional
* Author photo on page
* Links to YouTube and other pages
* Page layout contains two cards (video, info)
* Use a container to produce white space around the page

