# 9 - Services Architecture


> Cloud computing is creating irreversible changes in how computers are used 
> around the world.

---

## Services that Scale

Cloud services are the backbone of software development.  Whether you are 
developing software for small business or large enterprises it will almost
certainly result in applications that run in a data center.  These apps may 
be hosted in either and private or public cloud but the fundamental issues are
very similar.

Corporate policies for data storage often drive critical architectural decisions.
Cloud services must be built on sound security practices that protect the
data integrity and access within the system.  Many environments have very
restrictive policies which make it so that interactions with cloud systems
are closely controlled.  

Installation and setup are vital to get the system properly deployed initially
and managed on an ongoing basis.  Because of the unique issues with application
deployment and entire chapter has been devoted to that topic.  In this chapter
we will focus on the underlying architectural decisions that will allow your
system to scale over time.

Building web services is perhaps the most common software task today. This
produces some unique opportunities for reuse. We can create parts of a solution
that are easily isolated from one another. Each of these services can solve a
simple problem and may end up having a different life cycle than the rest of the
services that we use. This promotes reuse by letting us repurpose existing
solutions to solve new problems.

The rise of microservices has given us new design ideas. We can now think about
building and deploying systems that are much more focused on solving a specific
part of the overall product. We can then build more complex systems by
integrating them together to provide robust solutions for our customers.

Each of the services are built to address a specific concern. By limiting the
functionality of each system we can build systems that are far easier to
construct and operate. Control and data flow must be designed to meet the
business needs. The services paradigm makes scaling far easier than it has ever
been.

As the number of users push the boundaries of the existing system new designs
are needed to address the increased demand. The well-designed architecture built
around services allows portions of the system to be replaced to accommodate the
new demands without disrupting the entire system. Therefore, our architecture
directly sets the leverage potential of our web services.


### Scaling your Architecture

Services are intended to work well for some number of users. As demand increases
minor changes can be made to provide the required performance up to a certain
limit. Eventually the demands of the new users can't be met by the current 
solution. New bottlenecks emerge as the system grows. A system that works 
well for 100 concurrent users will not work for 1000, and a solution for 10,000
users will not scale to 100,000. 

Usage can be measured in requests per second that the system is intended to
respond to. Every order of magnitude in usage requires that some fundamental 
elements of the design be revisited. Each of these orders in growth represents
a technical horizon, and typically has a corresponding business horizon for 
the company as well. What is your next horizon and how quickly do you need to
meet it? Some business are under tremendous pressure to scale while others
are not.

This chapter lays out some principles and practices that will help you scale
your systems. If scaling is not a major issue for you then you can skip forward
to learn about other operational issues.

To build services that scale you need to find and eliminate the bottlenecks that
are preventing your system from performing at the required level. Once a key
choke point has been identified a new design must remove the bottleneck while
not disturbing anything else.


### Design for Leverage

Reuse is an architectural concern. A poor design is very difficult to change to
meet new requirements.  Modifying one part of the design forces an understanding
of the entire system and may break the software in unexpected ways. This is a
design problem. In order to scale your services you must start with a realistic
assessment of if your system can be scaled. Is the design sound enough to let
you refactor portions safely? If not you are better off building a new system
that leverages the understanding while rewriting the current system.

The preferred option is to scale your existing system rather than replace it.
Scaling your current system means that you are working with legacy code.
Everything discussed in the chapter about Design Leverage applies here.
Architectural and development requirements include:

* Complete battery of end-to-end tests with high test coverage
* Core skill at refactoring
* Version control of all app and configurations
* Skill at instrumenting and performance measurement
* Effective development process to deploy code safely
* Robust server strategy: dev, test, staging, production

If you are lacking any of these key ingredients then fill the gap before moving
on. Ignoring these issues can result in making serious mistakes that are
difficult to recover from. When you have what you need it is time to begin the
work of scaling to the next horizon.

The actual work of scaling starts with finding the next bottleneck that is
holding you back. Is your application compute bound or I/O bound, which servers
are backing up the requests, which queues are getting long, where is your
maximum latency? Use analytic tools to watch all of the servers and how they
perform. Find the next hot spot.  This is your target for redesign.

Now, propose several different ways to solve the problem and select the simplest
first. Prototype the proposed solution and see if it scales to the demands of
the next generation. If it does then simplify it further. Build bridges and
adapters to let you use all of the other parts of your system without
modification. Once you are sure that this solution works then you can remove the
extra logic for the adapters to get to the final solution.


### Separation of Concerns

Typical software products have a large number of different concerns to address:

* User authentication
* Authorization
* Web page routing
* Business application logic
* View rendering and template expansion
* CSS styling
* Dynamic behavior within views
* Object relational mapping
* Data persistence
* Database queries and filters

Each of these functional concerns should be implemented in a single place (as
much as possible). If functionality is spread out across the system then changes
in one area will cause problems in areas that are seemingly not connected. Can
you point to a single place where each of these concerns is addressed?

There are some cross-cutting concerns that can not be entirely isolated, but
they should be strongly encapsulated and consistently used throughout the
system. This includes things authentication, logging, metrics, and caching.
Although these concerns touch your system in many places they should touch it
very lightly. A simple interaction should regulate the degree of coupling that
the cross-cutting concerns have with the application logic. Otherwise you are
asking for trouble when you attempt to leverage your design.


## Fracture Planes

Every system has some natural boundaries within it. A fracture plane is a 
natural place to divide the design and impose boundaries for the design
abstractions. A good architecture has reasonable divisions built into the design.
On each side of the boundary completely different concerns are implemented
and these are isolated from interacting with each other.

Find natural points of integration and build your architecture around them.
Imagine independent life spans for each of the components touching the
interfaces. Could you reasonably replace these parts independently without
having to redesign the other part?  If so then you have the right abstraction
boundary. Evaluate cohesion and coupling of your subsystems and components. We
are after loose coupling between the parts and strong cohesion within a given
part.

Some boundaries within the system are due to dependencies in the technology
stack. For example if one part of the code is dependent on the .Net framework
and another it dependent on a Java library, then this may be a fracture plane in
the design. Or if one part is built in Ruby and another in Python it may be a
good place to split the design.


### Architectural Layers

All systems are built in layers that are characterized by different types of
concerns. The software will eventually be deployed on a server somewhere.
The cloud hosting services provided by Amazon Web Services or Google Compute 
Engine can be viewed as a service layer in our architecture.

The software will execute in some platform environment that is built on top of
an operating system like Linux, Windows, or Mac. This in effect is another layer
of our system. On top of the operating systems we build application logic that
relies on particular programming languages. Each language provides us with
access to libraries that must be set up properly in order to deploy our
software.

Typical system layers:

* Hosting services
* Virtualization technology
* Operating System platform
* Programming language runtime
* Tools, libraries and frameworks
* Configuration and setup services
* Database engine
* Databases
* General tools for your company
* General app services for your company
* Application business logic that you wrote

It is important to understand the layers in your system. Every dependency may
illustrate layering of some kind. The system dependencies will have a profound
impact on the direction of the leverage that is possible. Your application logic
is built on a stack of dependencies. Many of these dependencies are deeply
coupled into your app logic. It is not possible to change a core dependency
without rewriting all of the code built on top.

Replacing the lower level layers of a design typically requires a complete
rewrite. If this must be done then make sure that you are prepared for the cost
of building a new system. Scaling an application should not typically involve
such radical loss of leverage.
 

### Front-end/Back-end

For the last twenty years most applications have been patterned after a three-
tier architecture model:

* _Presentation layer_ - implements the user interface
* _Application layer_ - houses all the business logic for the app
* _Data layer_ - creates persistence for all of the data within the app

Each of these layers has unique concerns. Select technologies that give you the
best possible leverage within each layer. Wait for a good time to switch the key
technology that you use so that you do not loose leverage in the transition.
When you are building components from scratch is a good time to replace obsolete
technologies with better ones.

Develop your own rationale for which tools you are moving towards and look for
opportunities to move into them. Here is a sample of technologies that we use
daily in my company.

* _Presentation_: Angular JS, Bootstrap

* _Application_: Python, Django, Django REST Framework

* _Data_: Postgres, Mongo DB, Redis


### Benefits of Microservices

Web applications used to be single apps that ran on a single server. Now there
are typically many apps that run on managed clusters of servers. Each of the
services is hosted on one or more servers throughout the cluster. Service-
oriented architecture is the new normal expectation. A series of web services
work together to accomplish the overall task for the business.

Recently, a new architectural model has emerged with the name Microservices. The
design model favors fine-grained services each of which do only one task. The
services are typically connected using REST APIs to talk to one another to
coordinate the overall product goals.

Microservices encourage more leverage by making the coupling between the service
extremely loose. The REST API isolates details about each type of business logic
to a single service. For example, a system that tracks inventory would contain a
single service that would know how to represent the list of parts. Other
services would know how to request changes but wouldn't understand the way that
parts were represented.

The application is built around simple services that are aggregated together.
Any service can be replaced with a similar one. This makes it easy to replaces
pieces of the application constantly without risking the entire app. Leverage
abounds as every piece takes on its own life cycle. Scaling happens by locating
the current bottleneck and fixing the service that is impeding the traffic flow.
Microservices provide a path to much smoother scaling.


### Data Services - Architecture and Partitioning

Almost every system that you are likely to build revolves around handling data.
Since this is such a significant part of modern software design you should
devote a significant portion of design time to your data handling architecture.

If your problem is primarily about the relationships between data types then a
relational database may be a good choice. On the other hand, if your primary
concern is scaling then NoSQL solutions may be a better fit for you.

Another concern about designing persistence for your data is the boundary
between the code and the database. Every piece of data may need to have two
representations: one as objects in memory, and another as rows in a database
table. You may want to think about how to use an ORM (Object Relational
Mapping) to convert seamlessly between these two data encodings.

Think about building reusable data solutions rather than rebuilding them from
scratch each time. Plan how the structure of your data schema will need to
change between your different systems. Because data is so central it can either
be an enabler for leverage or its greatest threat.


### REST Pattern

The design pattern for RESTful web services lets you build strong key
abstraction based upon a set of commonly understood trade-offs. REST is short
for Representational State Transfer. It is the most widely accepted design idiom
for encapsulating a type of data behind a web service.

REST systems are built around data types. For instance, the CRUD operations are
typically implemented by using different HTTP methods:

* Create - HTTP put
* Read - HTTP get
* Update - HTTP post
* Delete - HTTP delete

The REST pattern dictates how to use the commands to access and manipulate the
data that is held within the REST service. For more information go to the
wikipedia article at
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representational_state_transfer or consult the
definitive source book from O'Reilly, "RESTful Web Services; Web services for the
real world", by Leonard Richardson, Sam Ruby.

To create REST services that maximize leverage you should start by building
around the most significant nouns within your system. Some data types are core
to your domain and these require the best encapsulation. Then define the CRUD
operations for each of your core data types. Add other operations that are
required to implement your business needs.

REST is well understood. Your goal should be to leverage off of that
understanding to avoid building your own solution from scratch. I recommend that
you consider building a solution based on one of the great web service
frameworks. My favorite tool is the Django REST Framework. A skilled developer
can build a prototype of a web service in a day. It has built in solutions for
user authentication, advanced security, and automatic generations of all the
interface code.

All you need to do is define the specific objects that you need to represent and
the framework will generate all of the code for you. The code includes the API
logic with authentication and even a testing GUI to interact with your object
types.

As you move into the world of automatic code generation, it is critical that you
build a testing infrastructure in parallel with the product. It does you no good
to automatically generate 10,000 lines of untested code. Invest in an
infrastructure that lets you create test code that contains your business logic.
More on this is the next chapter.


## Evolutionary Architecture

Building architectures that scale is straightforward when following a few simple
rules and applying them rigorously to each new problem.

* Keep your design simple
* Keep your code clean
* Keep your code integrated
* Keep your code tested

Problems in your architecture emerge when you relax one of these requirements.
Over time, a small issue can cause bigger problems if it is not addressed.
Regular team reviews of the code and design will keep things clean and tidy and
reviews will also spread the information around within your team.


### Strategies That Work

At this point you probably have an easy way to measure the overall complexity of
your system. This will become an important tool in your planning. Don't continue
to make random changes without being able to see the effect that those changes
are having on system complexity. Remember, system complexity is a major driver
of cost. Each day strive to lower the complexity.

Your complexity measure should also give you a number for the complexity of each
part of your system. I recommend that you track the complexity of your top
subsystems and measure the quality of each subsystem. This creates an accurate
picture of the top hot spots in the application at all times. A hot spot will
have the most defects outstanding and the highest complexity. In my experience,
these two things always go together. Don't give bugs a chance to breed.


### The Services Paradigm

Find the natural boundaries that separate groups of functions. Within the
subsystem the cohesion should be high. In other words, all the parts of the
subsystem probably talks to each other, while the subsystems are only loosely
connected to one another. The subsystems should be loosely coupled, but
internally well-connected.

Plan out how you can strengthen the architectural design of these interfaces.
For example, two subsystems that are connected through a scripting language are
bound to be much looser than if functions are called directly.

Clean and simple interactions make for a good design. A limited vocabulary on an
interface lowers complexity. Clarify exactly who calls who and what they say.
Reduce the amount of knowledge that different subsystems have of each other.
Build great components into web services by finding those blocks of
functionality that belong together and provide a REST API for the service. These
types of services are very easy to scale over time because they are nicely
isolated from other services.


### Reusable Services and Integration

Review each group of related data types. Data types tend to cluster around the
functionality of your problem domain. Identify these clusters and build web
services around them.

Build services with canonical interfaces. Use the common verbs to help you
identify common operations that might be expected. For example: Create, Read,
Update, Delete can often be applied to help define a nice canonical interface
for a set of nouns. Another common use model is Open, Read, Write, Close,
defined for use with files but the applications can go far beyond that.

Produce the types of interfaces that other developers would expect to see.
Follow the principle of least astonishment. If they expect something, consider
providing it.

Maintain the integration of the entire system. Don't let pieces remain in
isolation for very long. They will be difficult to integrate with the rest of
the system unless they are held in a state of continuous integration. While
integration is important, so is fragmentation. Each piece must operate
successfully on its own. This prevents unwarranted dependencies from growing
like scar tissue between the components. Both integration and fragmentation of
the entire system is required for maintaining the overall health.

Standardize on service interaction models. Use common, high-level design
patterns to orchestrate the traffic flow between services. Identify reusable
techniques to manage transaction processing, queue management, and caching. All
of the high-level designs make it easier to scale your system and there are
off-the-shelf tools that will assist you in building out and managing the
system.


## Managing Performance

Study system performance on the production servers in your live operation. There
might be some surprises waiting for you. There is no substitute for analyzing
the actual  system performance. Study each of the systems to understand the
overall traffic flow rates. Measure typical and maximum latencies to understand
where the bottlenecks reside.

Examine how data architecture affects your performance. Imagine different ways
that your data might be partitioned across the system. Create some alternate
models for your data architecture and try to create experiments that will
validate your assumptions about what is really happening.

Implement caching wisely. Overall performance can be affected dramatically by
how you use caching. Improperly configured caching can destroy your throughput
while proper caching can have a huge benefit.

Track key performance metrics continuously. Use the experiments to understand
performance as a way to find the strategic locations for ongoing monitoring.
Then leave the best tap points in place to track the performance on a permanent
basis. Convert from doing performance analysis to performance monitoring. Set
thresholds for notification if certain measures go outside the normal bounds.


### Capacity Planning

Let business drive your development. As traffic increases, figure out how to
scale your operations to match the demand. Don't focus on problems that might be
in the distant future but start soon enough that you can complete the work
before impacting the perceived responsiveness of your system.

Respond to the current reality by honestly assessing how you are doing in the
eyes of your customers. Create a balance so that you don't overbuild or under-
build your product solution. Avoid solving potential problems until they are
actual problems that need to be addressed.

Identify the key bottlenecks that cause performance concerns and eliminate them.
These will typically be related to how the services cooperate with each other.
The most common areas of concern are related to authentication, caching, data,
locks, and traffic routing. It is rare that a single service is the bottleneck
because it is too slow.


### Data is the Key Concern

Most parts of an application scale easily to multiple servers. Data is the
central player in most applications so how data is handled can have a huge
impact on the overall performance. As your app becomes more complex you should
hire dedicated data architects to build solutions that will meet the demand.

Data may be replicated across many database servers and many databases. The data
may be partitioned by sharing it across many systems and geographies. These are
tricky problems and you should have highly skilled people that have spent years
thinking about the relevant issues working on them. But for smaller systems you
should focus on simpler solutions that will still meet the performance
requirements. The simpler the solution the more leverage you will get from it.

Choose an architecture that matches your business problem. Make sure that the
data queries are implemented efficiently. Measure the time required to do
queries to make sure there aren't any glaring issues in your database layouts.
Most databases provide tools for validating the data table structures.

Use load balancers to scale the number of users that are served by a single
server. If you are running clusters of database servers make sure that the
transactional load is evenly distributed across the servers. An idle server in a
busy cluster isn't contributing anything to the performance and may be caused by
a problem in the data architecture.


### Performance and Caching

Caching works well if the data is static. If each unique query can produce a
single answer then it is a candidate for caching. For example web pages, CSS
files, JS files, and images should all be managed through a cache. This can have
profound speed implications and allow you to scale many time over.

Beware of caching dynamic data - not all traffic is stateless. Certain requests
can't be cached reliably and so the cache must be configured to ignore these
items. Caching does introduce complexity into the system but if you need to
scale this is the first place to look for answers.

Be prepared to invest serious engineering into analyzing and fixing performance
problems. Understand both the reliability and performance implications of when
and how to flush the caches for each different type of data being tracked.


### Key Performance Metrics

Track the average and maximum number of concurrent users on your system. Learn
what days of the week and times of the day are most likely for peak traffic.
Design your performance goals around the peak traffic points. Also track the
peaks over time to get an indication of how fast your usage is expanding. This
will help you set reasonable goals for your capacity planning.

Measure the average and maximum response times. Understand the correlation between
the number of users and response times. This will tell you a lot about how
much margin is built into the system or how close to the edge you are.

Watching the system load each service is another indicator of margin within your
operation. Which server types are the busiest? Adding more capacity here will
speed up your system while adding capacity to idle servers will have no impact.
Utilize specific measurements to calibrate your mental model for how your system
is behaving in the real world.



## Best Practice #8 - _Build your system from loosely connected services for 
optimal flexibility and reuse._


***Problem***<br>
It is very difficult to develop and maintain large applications that are built
as a single lump. Applications should be built in layers that match the
functional needs of the problems that are being solved. Applications should be
built as a set of services that interact with each other.

Poorly designed services are too large or too interconnected to allow any
significant leverage. If it is difficult to make changes to one service without
breaking something else, the maintenance of the system will be exorbitant,
leading to an early replacement of the system.

As more users are added the system must be scaled up to meet the new demands.
This requires active modification of the software. A system that can't be
maintained for a reasonable cost will end up being replaced.

***Solution***<br>
A well-defined system is built in layers and multiple services interact with
each other to accomplish the customers' goals. Because the services are
independent of each other they can each be optimized without breaking other
parts of the system. This makes it easy to make changes required to meet the
increasing performance demands.

As we scale the system, special attention is given to data architecture, 
caching, and load balancing between the servers. This clean architecture can
evolve over many years to meet new challenges.

***Next Steps***

* Identify the specific distinct layers in your system.
* Identify the unique services used.
* Map which concerns are addressed by which services.
* Analyze your interfaces. Would REST be a benefit?
* Measure users, response time, server load.

