# 12 - Knowledge Management


> "To know what you know and what you do not know, that is true knowledge".
>
> ~ _Confucius_

---

## Leverage Understanding

Building software is about solving problems and requires a broad scope of
understanding. Valuable understanding was acquired in previous work and can now
be applied to new problems. Re-learning everything from scratch with each new
project is extravagantly wasteful but that is what most groups do if there is no
standard process for capturing and organizing knowledge. Throughout my career I
have worked with many different development teams and very few organizations
have had effective tools for managing knowledge. They may be very advanced in
how they deal with source code but completely inattentive when dealing with
knowledge that is not software.

A system and a set of tools is required to leverage our understanding of current
problems into the solutions needed tomorrow. This type of leverage is often
missing because we don't have an effective way to gather and share our team's
knowledge. Building an effective way to deal with information is a critically
important aspect of becoming more productive.

Many organizations default to relying on the memory of individual staff members
or private notes on their computers. This is obviously unreliable and will lead
to a lot of wasted time and effort to relearn valuable knowledge. Without a
knowledge management system, vital information will be lost every time there is
a personnel change on a project.

A storehouse of knowledge that truly captures everything that your team needs to
know is essential. Create an easy way to find all of the information quickly and
make it easy for people to contribute new information. If it is too difficult to
add information it will cause people to ignore the system.

Now let's explore how to build a great information retrieval and sharing system
that is low cost to set up and to run. There are several different aspects of
dealing with information to consider. Understanding goes through distinct stages
of refinement and different activities are needed to deal with knowledge
throughout each stage. Think of these aspects as a "Knowledge Life Cycle".

* Capture - The process of recording new ideas as they occur
* Organize - Ideas need collaboration and connections to other related ideas
* Refine - Editing and critique are essential parts of building great ideas
* Share - To be useful, an idea should be shared with others outside the team

As knowledge develops through each stage the idea will be strengthened and
refined into something that provides unique business value. If an idea fails to
be developed in one of these stages it will tend to atrophy and die. Review is a
key goal of having a well-defined process for managing information. By making it
easy to see the progress of many ideas, you can also spot ideas that are stuck
and in need of attention.


## Capture - Where Ideas Go to Thrive

No idea is birthed fully-formed. A small idea may come in the form of a hunch or
an unsolved problem so it's critical to capture the concept before it
evaporates. A quick note is adequate to record the concept and spark the memory
at a later time. Then this reminder can be used to more fully reconstruct the
original thought. Ideas that start as a simple concept can be expanded into a
full-blown product plan over time. Capturing information should involve the
following elements.

* Identify the problem
* Identify the solution
* Identify the context where the idea applies
* Identify the limitations and caveats for applying the idea

Building a robust system to manage knowledge is easily done with tools that
are low cost and readily available. My favorite tool is Evernote because it is
easy to use and offers a broad range of services.  You can also use a wiki that
is either in a private or public cloud.  The critical thing is that you select
a tool that can be set up quickly, is easy to use, and one that you can commit
to for the long term.  Switching systems can be expensive and you want to avoid
this if possible.

A knowledge system must be exceedingly easy to use - this is a critical
requirement. Engineers are busy and they will only use tools that they see
immediate value in. Anything that looks like busywork will be neglected and
fall quickly into disuse.

Ideas come and go quickly - your tools need to be setup to take advantage of
the fleeting nature of ideas. The system you define needs be accessible from
anywhere. Whether the device at hand is a phone, post-it note, email, random
text file, photo, or a screen shot - they must all be compatible with your
knowledge management system in order to get people to accept and use it.


### Window of Opportunity

Any new idea must be recorded within 15 seconds because if it takes any longer
people will skip using it, resulting in lost ideas. They will make a mental
note and then promptly forget to follow through. Count the number of steps
that are required to record an idea. Here is an example capture path:

* Light bulb goes on (attention: great idea generated)
* Grab my phone
* Click on Idea app
* Type a few words to record the thought for later
* Put phone in pocket

There is a narrow window of opportunity in which to capture ideas. When
lightning strikes there needs to be immediate access to a means of recording
the idea while it is still fresh. Ideas evaporate quickly when they aren't
captured, but the very act of capturing an idea will spark other related
thoughts.

Most engineers are teaming with ideas. The ability to collect the ideas and then
have a standard process for developing them is vital. Capturing and processing
ideas creates an incubator effect as ideas that start off as half-baked
hunches can be cultivated to produce real gems. Your goal should be to provide a
system with a smooth path from hunch to breakthrough.


### Zero Overhead Capture

In order to capture as many ideas as possible it is necessary to remove all of
the barriers to record a thought. If your knowledge capture process requires
getting on a computer and browsing to a document that can be edited you may have
already lost them. Instead, think about a low tech solution as simple as a pen
and a small pad of paper. Capturing the seed of an idea may be as simple as
writing a single word on paper.

Now imagine replacing the paper pad with Evernote or other similar tools.
Whether you are at your computer or just have your phone, you will have access
to the same set of notes from anywhere. Evernote is extremely convenient to
capture a single idea since you can also make short voice recordings or take
photos as notes. Then when you're at a computer you can process these notes to
make sense of the original intent. Provide several different on-ramps to make it
convenient to record ideas in many different settings.


### Universal Capture

Capturing knowledge is a prerequisite to managing information so capture the
full knowledge of each team member. Treat other types of knowledge with the same
level of care that you use to track software changes because the non-software
knowledge is often just as important as the software we so diligently protect.

Imagine setting up a system to track everything. Each discussion about project
schedule, user requirements, design challenges, and alternative patterns that
should be evaluated, is recorded.

There is power in teamwork and collaboration in this endeavor. Many brains
thinking about problems will always produce better answers than people working
in isolation. You can get creative to boost the collaboration process by doing
things like running contests to see who can come up with the highest number of
best answers to sticky design problems. By having a repository of requirements,
designs, problems, solutions, and stories, you have the foundation of widespread
and meaningful collaboration within your team.

The goal is to record as much as possible so content can spur additional
thinking and conversation. Avoid heavy requirements because that's a
collaboration killer. Record many different kinds of information in your system.
Here's some examples of things you should include:

* Formal design specifications
* Formal product requirements
* Product ideas
* Product road map for several generations
* Rejected requirements
* Requirements being considered
* Design patterns
* Coding patterns
* Coding standards
* How to set up tools
* Guidelines for version control
* Release guidelines and version numbering
* Systemic problems that need solutions
* Competitive analysis of similar products
* Project planning schedules
* Risk assessment and mitigation plan
* Contract templates
* Database schema 
* One-page architecture diagrams
* Presentations on market research
* Presentations on project progress
* Product backlog of future features
* Test strategy and plans
* Tricky test cases
* Build tools
* Archival requirements
* Product support plan
* Warranty data from previous products
* Productivity metrics
* Retrospective summaries
* Customer use cases, customer needs (unsolved problems)
* Cheat sheets on tool usage

You get the idea - the sky is the limit. There are thousands of pieces of useful
data that you should be able to find easily. Often they are stored in a file
system hierarchy and it's very difficult to find what you need. Use your
information management system to track the URLs to the complex binary data, but
make it easy to find what people need. Engineers should never have to browse
through a lengthy file tree looking for stuff. Instead, let them quickly find
the content by querying for keywords.

Information may exist in many different forms in many different systems - this
makes it very difficult to find and modify. Consider the advantages of
bringing all this information together. Try to standardize the data format as
much as possible. Moving to a text file representation makes the data
universally searchable. Begin moving data from various locations where it
currently exists into a single location. Then the knowledge management system
can function as a resource for all development.

Build a system that is customized to your needs but use existing tools to
solve all of the generic problems. You could build the entire system from
scratch if you believe it is absolutely necessary. However, your time is
probably better spent building other parts of your system. Realistically, you
should be able to create something useful in about a day. After that you can
justify the cost of making it better by the immediate benefit it produces.

          
### Intellectual Property

Software is all about inventing things that solve problems in the real world.
This often generates ideas that should be legally protected. When resolving 
legal disputes over ideas the timing of the idea first being conceived and 
reduced to practice is extremely important.  Sometimes this is the deciding
factor in court cases that happen years later.

You should begin thinking about legal protection at the time the ideas are first
conceived. Make sure that whatever system you are using for recording knowledge
has a history that can be used in any future disputes.  It may also be useful 
to have a regular process of archiving the repository in a safe location.

Protecting your intellectual property is a business decision, but make sure that
the tools you are using support any decision that might be made.  Legal protection
follows the following general pattern:

* File an invention disclosure with a patent attorney.  This starts the clock 
and marks the time of the original idea.
* Create and file a patent application with the patent offices where you would
like the protection.
* The application will be reviewed and the patent office may ask for amendments
to the application before it can be accepted.
* Once the application is granted then it can be used to protect the invention.

Your system to track and manage information should be consistent with the 
business goals that you have.  These goals may change over time, so it is 
important to give yourself the maximum level of flexibility.  The key attributes
you should have are the ability to find information quickly and have a legally
binding time stamp associated with the data.


## Organize - Identify the Natural Connections

Once information in captured, it must be organized. One approach is to
organize the knowledge as a series of articles because the topics covered by
the various articles are naturally connected to each other. The information
management system should use these connections. Organizing the data is about
finding the connections between topics and allowing people to use them to find
the related articles.

There are several different ways to classify information. The most popular
method is to organize topics within a hierarchy. Computer file systems have made
this the standard mechanism that is familiar to everyone. However, this is the
least useful way to organize lots of topics and it has many severe limitations.
The most significant problem with hierarchies is that they assume one strong
paradigm for organization. Each topic is represented at one location within the
hierarchy. Most real world problems don't fit into this model.

Another model is to organize topics using keywords. This has the advantage
that the same topic may be classified many different ways. Applying keywords
as tags can be done easily in almost every popular tool. Whether you are
building your own tool from scratch, using a complete system, or building a
tool using Evernote or similar app, using tags is the best way to represent
topics.

The task of organizing topics involves finding the underlying connections and
classifying the topics so they can be found later with a single query.
Organizing your content should involve the following elements:

* Find connections with other related topics
* Ask how others solve similar problems?
* Identify alternative solutions
* Build out the concept into a complete article on the topic
* Think about how this topic will be queried later

Think of tags that can be used to describe the new idea. Search the system for
similar ideas that may shed some light on how you might move forward. Search 
the internet for related topics. Capture interesting articles and incorporate
them into your knowledge management system. Retain information about where
new source material is found so that you can avoid legal issues by improperly
using any intellectual property.


### Connect

Ideas don't exist in isolation, they are always connected. Finding the
appropriate connections is an important part of the development. Using tags will
classify the content into major groupings. This may be a designation of the
format of the info, or the phase of the life cycle, or the technology that is
used. There are many ways to classify materials and our goal is to use all of
them. Next, explore the connections that you find through this classification by
browsing through related topics and looking for interesting similarities.

Use hyperlinks to add hard connections between topics - linking related topics
allows others to make these same associations later. This can often add critical
insight. You can add links to articles about the subject or keywords to help
someone search for related topics.

Unsolved mysteries and unresolved problems can plague systems for a long time.
One of the most useful purposes of a knowledge management system is to highlight
ongoing weaknesses. This is less formal and more flexible than an issue tracking
system which deals with concrete flaws in the system. Your group _brain_ can be
a place to explore alternative designs in order to understand several competing
ways to solve a particular problem.


### Complete the Proposal

Part of the organization stage is to develop the details of the idea by fleshing
out the particular problem and propose multiple solutions. Next, evaluate
related problems and solutions and select the best alternatives to move forward
with the idea. Since no piece of knowledge lives in isolation, every best
practice, tutorial, machine configuration tips, or feature list is connected to
other bits of information. These connections are important to build into the
description of the idea because they guide others in how to be successful when
working with this topic.

After ideas have been captured they must be nurtured and cultivated. This
entire phase is about gathering info and connecting it together into some kind
of network. Synergy occurs as various pieces of information are assembled into
a new picture of truth. New insights and levels of understanding may come
abruptly as a flash or they may be the result of persistently working a slow
hunch.

Substantial breakthroughs may take years to cultivate. People may come and go
during that time-frame. It is imperative that you don't lose the information
you are building over time. The best way to protect ideas is to create a
system that truly embodies the working knowledge of your staff.

I was once on a team that had spent years cultivating a deep base of knowledge
in a particular domain but the business decided to outsource all future software
development. Over the next year about 90% of the knowledge was lost in the
transition. This ultimately resulted in a massive level of waste and a dramatic
decrease in the success of the next products. This loss could have been
mitigated by having an appropriate system of knowledge management in place.


### Managing Keywords

Create tools that expose the data in a natural way. A vocabulary of 100 unique
keywords can be used as tags to get any type of information that you wish to
retrieve in less than a minute. Build your own Software Brain on
top of an app like Evernote simply by setting up some tags.

My own personal Brain in Evernote houses about 1600 notes and is supported by
less than a hundred keys. I search for one or more tags and can scroll through
all of the matching items in chronological order. Finding a needle in a haystack
has never been easier. Here are some example tags:

* design
* plan
* issue
* todo
* done
* code
* pattern
* test
* idea
* requirement
* presentation
* book
* image
* diagram
* money
* staff
* skill
* dependency
* metric
* task

If you want to get fancier you can add structure to your keys to help people
with the selection of keywords. Here is a set of structured keys that could be
used as an example when building your own.

    Languages:
        Java Script
        Python
        C++
        C#
        Java
        Ruby
        Go
        HTML
        CSS
        XML

    Operating Systems and Servers:
        Linux
        Windows
        Mac
        AWS
        Google App Engine

    Development:
        Requirements
        Specifications
        Design
        Code snippets

    Test:
        Test plans
        Test strategies
        Test tools
        Test cases
        Regression
        Coverage reports

    Project planning:
        Progress tracking
        Metrics
        Schedule
        Slides for Management Summit

    Tools:
        Tool stack
        Tutorials
        Internet guides

These lists will vary widely based on your domain. The primary lesson here is
that you can make the list match precisely the topics that you wish to organize.
How will people ask for topics?  Give them those keys. Let the tags grow
organically to reflect the underlying content.


### Prioritize

Not all ideas are worth pursuing. By capturing information in one place it
makes it easy to select the strongest ones to pursue. Use a sieve approach to
select the ideas that have the most value. Old ideas will sink to the bottom
so it's unnecessary to manually remove them from the system. On the other
hand, ideas that are being updated will naturally rise to the top of the
priority list.

Prioritization is an important aspect of organization. Ideas that appear
feeble at first may be strengthened as other people develop them. The most
important areas of discussion and design will get extra mindshare. In this
way, the knowledge management system can be a focal point for nurturing a
healthy discussion of design and software techniques and skills.


### Core Tool for the Whole Team

If knowledge is to be truly shared, it must be viewed as a team resource. Bring
the entire team together to figure out how to get the degree of collaboration
you need. We have all seen plenty of examples of someone trying to push their
pet tool. Without grassroots support for sharing knowledge you won't succeed in
building a collaborative system.

Start small. Select a pressing problem and show how a simple tool could improve
communication. As more people begin to engage, encourage their efforts. In the
beginning, focus on specific problems where the system makes it much easier for
everyone to be successful. Eventually you may want to assign a champion to carry
the vision of knowledge sharing.

Add ideas that you gather on the internet as articles in the system. Capture
content from other teams and use all of this to craft a rich collection of
knowledge. Allow the repository to grow organically. The information should
cover the range from highly organized to completely disorganized. This range
helps the tool see more usage over a wide range of purposes.

### Problem and Solution Pattern

One distinct pattern that is very useful in a knowledge management system is a
recipe. A cookbook is filled with recipes that teach the novice cook how to
get an outcome that is designed by a master chef. This approach can be used to
great effect here. A recipe addresses a specific problem and outlines a
specific solution that can be applied to get a good outcome.

There are several key aspects about a recipe. It is simple and tactical and it
addresses one outcome and approach. Later it may be expanded into a tutorial
that addresses a range of side issues. A recipe sharpens the focus to improve
the chances of success.

Key limitations should be highlighted. It must be clear when the recipe
doesn't apply and there should also be information about the expected ROI and
key success indicators. The recipe should cover the essential elements that
need to be covered and then stop. A catalog of these recipes can be invaluable
to an organization because it can really bring the team together.


## Refine - Ready for the Sharks?

During the refinement stage, the topic is applied in the real world. A best
practice is created to show others how to get good results. It may require
some experimentation to find the techniques that work best. At this stage you
will also discover the key limitations of the practice and how to avoid them.
Peer review can help to polish the information and make it more useful to
others. This stage is about proving usefulness and should include the
following aspects:

* Evaluate competing alternatives
* Foster experimentation
* Identify limitations
* Tune critical parameters and attributes
* Review by others to improve the ideas

An idea isn't really ready until is has been scrutinized by others. Everything
sounds great on paper but the real test comes when other people review the
work and are allowed to make their own contribution to it. Seldom is a single
designer so brilliant that they create ideas that can't be improved. The more
an idea is reviewed the better it gets.

The system you set up can have a big influence on how ideas get reviewed and
refined over time. The primary goal of this system should be to invite as much
participation as possible. The ideas should be viewable, searchable, and
easily connected with other topics.

A version control system must be used within your knowledge management system in
order to prevent accidental deletions or corruption of the system. Some
organizations develop complex rules about who can edit what content but this is
almost always a mistake. If abuse and disagreement occurs it should be addressed
with the people in conflict, rather than adding new constraints to using the
system.

The greatest danger for any group is that information becomes isolated. If
there is conflict it can be worked out. In fact, constructive conflict is a
requirement for good design. If no dissenting opinions are ever heard then
groupthink has taken over and innovation is dead. Use your info system as a
focal point for design discussions and collaboration. Invite everyone to edit
and interact.

You can use mistakes as an opportunity for training. Teach new engineers how
they can get their ideas accepted without damaging the work of others. The
system that houses the knowledge of an organization is a great place for
public debate.


### Review

Reviewing and refining is a critical key to successfully maintaining
information over time. "Write-only" documents offer very little value. A
document must be read in order to be useful. It should be easy for someone to
offer contributions as they are reading and it must be a natural and seamless
activity. Systems that make it hard to collaborate will quickly fall into
disuse. As articles are edited by multiple authors you create a vested
interest in protecting and developing the content.

Once there are several interested parties working on a topic they can have an
ongoing discussion. They may also choose to set aside time for periodic
reviews. This is especially useful on controversial designs and requirements.
Remember that constructive conflict is good and should be encouraged.


### Experiment

Some ideas require more than just discussion. Sometimes prototypes must be
built to validate the concepts. The knowledge management system can be a good
place to explore which designs and tools need further development. The key
assumptions can be enumerated and the validating evidence presented. It can
also be a great way to publicize the results of the experiments.

Many designs require tuning in order to function correctly.The authors can
perform the work to find key parameters and post the information that will
make it easy to duplicate the same results without having to repeat the
experimentation.

As designs are shared throughout the organization it is useful to have a place
to discuss the experience. If someone tries to use a pattern and fails, that
is very valuable information. Why did it fail? How can the design be adapted
to work over a wider range? Sharing experience is the sign that collaboration
is truly taking hold in a team. Gathering a team history can make it easy to
bring new people up to speed.


### Test Assumptions

In the book Lean Startup, Eric Gries discusses the key elements of building an
agile startup business. One of the interesting principles in the book is that
everyone has assumptions that we aren't aware of. He advocates testing these
assumptions as early as possible in a project. The same is true of a software
project - all of our plans and designs are based on assumptions and frequently
these assumptions are unspoken.

The first step to validating our assumptions is to make them visible. Once we
have articulated the assumptions we can figure out ways to validate them. The
system we've built to manage knowledge is a great place to have this
conversation.

Identify the key assumptions that will affect your business and your engineering
work. How can you design an experiment that will let you get an answer to the
pressing questions early? Identifying the key assumptions and testing them can
go a long way towards addressing controversy on your project. Begin to put
systems in place that will help you answer your most critical questions early.


### Quantify Your Content

As more of your information is built into the knowledge management system you
have a great opportunity for data mining. Simply counting relevant types of
information will give you insight into what you are tracking. How much of your
content is related to project status, design, requirements, code, or tests? Is
your information primarily tactical or strategic? These are important questions
that can be answered quickly with a few queries.

There are a few metrics that are important to track. How frequently are new
topics being added and existing ones modified? If topics aren't being added
this system won't really provide any useful value. On the other hand, if topics
aren't being modified it may indicate that no one is reading the topics. A
topic that is read will frequently be edited to update the information. You
need both of these numbers to be strong in order to have a healthy knowledge
manager tool.

It is a good idea to periodically review the oldest content in the system
because it represents the stalest content that is still being tracked. Some of
the content is probably no longer useful at all and should be removed while
other content may have historical value and should remain. It is a good idea to
spend an hour once a month browsing through the articles to see if the system is
moving in the right direction.


## Share - Time to Go Public

As ideas are developed and accepted within a team they reach a point where they
are ready to share more broadly. Many problems are commonly seen in different
places. Select the problems that you think might have the greatest impact for
others and evaluate your solution. Have you solved the problem in a sufficiently
general way so that it is useful to others, or is more work required before it
is ready?

The sharing stage involves these important tasks:

* Be Crowd-Sourced
* Provide opportunity to vote for the best ideas
* Standardize the application
* Identify future steps

When you have a great solution available, share the good news with others.
Build a prototype to show how the idea can be used in a context beyond the
original usage. Create a one-hour training seminar to entice others to use
your design. The effort invested into inventing something cool should be
leveraged as widely as possible.

Look beyond the basic reuse of the code library to a deeper level. Look for
design idioms and best practices that could also be shared with others. Code
reuse is great but there are additional ways to leverage your new understanding.
Build a great solution for your product _and_ keep looking for ways to get even
more value through leverage.


### Showcase

A prototype is the best way to get your idea accepted by others. If you build a
solution within the context of your main product structure then engineers on
other teams will be reluctant to accept it. There is some unknown amount of work
to isolate the breakthrough idea from the natural entanglements of the product
code. This work has to be done in order for others to adopt your concept. Build
an isolated prototype that is as simple as possible. It should showcase your
contribution and stop there.

Once you have a strong prototype that demonstrates the relevant concept, turn
it into a great presentation with drama and humor. Build a slide deck that
culminates with a live demo. Demonstrate the benefits of the design to anyone
that will listen.

The knowledge management system should be used to provide all of the relevant
documents that will support your entire concept. Build a single "Getting
Started With ..." document to provide everything needed in less than an hour.
Provide a User Guide, Installation Guide, Concept Proposal, Design Info, and
source code for the prototype and tests. Packaging makes a difference so don't
skimp here.


### Contests

Imagine a culture of sharing, learning, and inventing. Leverage thrives in an
environment rich with collaboration. One great way to promote this type of
leverage is by sponsoring an Inventor's Contest. Challenge the participants to
show off the coolest thing they have invented in the last year. After people
become familiar with the event it could easily be many individual's favorite day
at work.

Capture these ideas and all of the artifacts in the info manager. Remember, our
goal is to save everything so that we can get the maximum leverage from every
document. This will become a treasure trove over time and a source of ideas for
discovering new solutions to problems.


### Beyond This Team

Why move your sharing beyond the borders of your own team? As software
architects, we have responsibility to the entire organization. Leverage the
success that you have within your local team to influence others. Be a leader by
focusing your energy on the benefit for the wider community.

By considering the needs of other parts of your organization you will certainly
discover solutions that your local work group needs. Capturing feedback from
others will influence your team in a positive direction. The nature of software
architecture is that it rests upon a broad understanding of problems and
solutions. Your interactions with others will broaden and deepen your
understanding and make you a better architect.


### Learn from Others

You aren't the first one to solve problems. Others have already been there and
done that. Make every effort to learn what has already been done then build new
solutions where the existing ones break down. Make fundamental contributions to
the designs of others and breathe new life into them. Copy great solutions and
make them even better. Evaluate, improve, and share designs on a weekly basis.
One of the key differences between architects and other engineers is their
ability to look beyond the specific problem to provide a broader and more
general solution. This is the heart of leverage.

Ideas benefit from interaction. Ultimately your success at leveraging the
knowledge you have will be largely determined by your ability to gather and
organize information from a wide variety of sources. Collecting documents is one
thing, but your goal is far more ambitious. The real goal must be to make sense
of all the knowledge that we have. Raw data must be turned into real, actionable
information.



## Best Practice #12 - _Create a robust system for sharing all types of knowledge
within your team._




***Problem***<br>
Many organizations have weak methods of tracking vital information. The actual
source code is managed effectively while all of the non-source information is
in danger of being lost. It is very expensive to relearn lost knowledge at a
later date because it often comes at a critical time in the project which
deepens the crisis even further.

Information needs to go through a series of development stages that are similar
to the software life cycle. The organization needs a way to track the knowledge
throughout its development and find key topics quickly when they are required.
Without a shared knowledge management system in place, few of these requirements
can be met. This often results in extravagant waste.

***Solution***<br>
A knowledge system is required to manage all of the different types of
information that are required by the software team and, possibly, the larger
organization. A custom tool can be built from scratch or assembled from other
pieces of software (for example Evernote). The system should operate to address
the needs of the knowledge life cycle:

* Capture
* Organize
* Refine
* Share

Each distinct stage of idea development has its own challenges. The information
management tool provides a complete solution to all of the different aspects of
managing knowledge. This system provides a nexus for sharing ideas and team
collaboration.

***Next Steps***

* Make an inventory of knowledge that you need on your project and record its
current location.
* Think about the development stages and what information is at what stages.
* Decide on the platform that can be used to create your information management
system.
* Build a simple repository
* Create a migration strategy for bringing in existing data.
* Measure use and react 

