# Lesson 34 - Professional Video


## LEARN        

### Office Hours
* If you need help please attend office hours
* MWF  1:30-2:30 by Zoom
* Zoom:  https://unco.zoom.us/j/99180652183
* Email: mark.seaman@unco.edu      


### Reading for Today  
* Read <a target="_blank" 
href="https://learn.zybooks.com/zybook/UNCOBACS200SeamanFall2021/chapter/5/section/3">
5.3 Positioning elements
</a>
* Follow <a target="_blank" href="/course/bacs200/docs/ZybooksReading">Reading Schedule</a>


### Today
* Project 12 - Professional Video


## BUILD


### Set YouTube options
* Details 
* Title & Description
* Thumbnail
* Audience
* Visibility
* Comments
* Misc info


### YouTube Options
* Publish Video
    * Basic Recording steps will get a public YouTube video.
* Details. Find Channel and Video
    * Select Details
* Title & Description
    * I used the share to YouTube option to upload the video.
* Thumbnail
    * Select the image that shows in the initial view.
* Audience
    * "Not made for kids", and "Restrict to over 18" will stop ads from playing
* Visibility
    * "Unlisted" lets you use the video in a page without having it be part of your YouTube channel
    * "Public" makes it visible in your channel.


### More YouTube Options
* Comments
    * "Disable comments" or "Hold all comments for review" to prevent spam
* Misc info
    * Set "Recording Date", "License", "Category"
* Allow Embedding
    * Supports the "Copy Embed Code". 
    * Adjust the size for the iframe


### Video Edit
* Download
    * Save the file from YouTube onto the local computer.
* Import Video
    * Import the file into the video editing app.
* Delete Pauses
    * Find all the sections where the audio is undesirable. 
    * Delete those sections.
* Share to YouTube
    * Upload the new file to YouTube. 
    * This creates a new video that can be handled as before.

### Create page with embedded YouTube video
* From YouTube "Copy Embed Video"
* Paste into project page


### Create Video Page
* Use a page template to create a page "bacs200/video.html"
* In YouTube use menu "Copy Embed Video"
* Paste into your web page
* Create page with embedded YouTube video


### Project 12 - Business Video 
* [Project Instructions](/course/bacs200/project/12)





