# 14 - Learning

> "The noblest pleasure is the joy of understanding."
>
> ~ _Leonardo da Vinci_

---

## Learning is a Strategic Capability

Many companies act like learning is primarily something you do at the beginning
of a career. Their hiring process rigorously screens for specific technology
skills and qualifications. The underlying belief is that only the knowledge that
a new hire already has is required to be successful. The truth is that what an
engineer knows at the moment of hiring is less important than their ability to
learn quickly and continuously. Technology moves so fast that the half-life of
specific technology skills and knowledge is probably about eighteen months. Any
engineer that stops learning is on a trajectory of rapid decline in usefulness
and productivity.

A strong base of knowledge is important. However, a habit of learning allows a
person to grow into whatever situation that presents itself. How often have you
added a new person to a team at the same time a change in the project rendered
their specific skill set unnecessary? It is smarter to hire an intelligent
learner than a statically knowledgeable one.

There are two primary skills from which all other engineering skills emanate.
Analytical thinking and problem solving enables engineers to tackle and solve
complex engineering problems. However, the ability learn quickly and effectively
fuels all the other skills that are vital to a successful career. What you know
now is not nearly as critical to your success as your ability to learn.


### Managing Knowledge to Optimize Results

So what does learning have to do with software leverage? If you have ever been
responsible for completing a project using a team of engineers that weren't
adequately prepared for the task then you know the resulting nightmare. Budgets
and expectations are set with the assumption of a skilled staff. When key skills
are missing, sufficient time must be budgeted to allow for the required
learning.

Making blind assumptions about the skill of a team is courting disaster. The
skills required for a specific project needs to be correlated with the skills
that are possessed by the team. When a gap is discovered, a plan must be created
to allow the necessary learning to take place. This is what we mean by skill
management - it is simply comparing the need to the asset and figuring out how to
close the gap.

In order to leverage software we need to have skilled developers that are
proficient with the technology they are using. The depth of knowledge about the
technology will prevent blunders when building the solutions. Both breadth and
depth of knowledge will prevent technical debt of many types. High leverage of
software is only possible if the residual technical debt remains low. Therefore,
the technical skill of the team will have a direct correlation to the possible
leverage.


### New Era with New Challenges

Changes due to the internet are fundamental, not incidental. The growth and
maturity of the information available online has changed everything. These
changes are here to stay and will only accelerate with time. This must change
the way that organizations think about the entire process of learning. This
chapter will explore the implications of learning and training in an internet
age.

Programming problems are solved instantly. A five-minute search on Stack
Overflow and Google will answer many technical questions. Insightful articles
and tutorials can teach us how to apply a technology to a specific situation.
It has never been easier to learn syntax, solve surface level issues, and even
troubleshoot certain classes of debugging problems. A favorite approach to
debugging is to cut and paste the raw error message into the Google search
engine and click "I'm Feeling Lucky".

These type of problems are related to *Programming in the Small*.  Small issues
require a minimal effort to resolve. The internet has brought us almost
instantaneous resolution of small issues. Dealing with tactical issues no longer
requires the bulk of our time as engineers. However, software is more than just
programming. *Programming in the Large* requires engineering skill that isn't
readily available as canned answers on Stack Overflow. Dealing with issues of a
large scope requires a different level of effort.

Unfortunately, many engineers mistake the ability to resolve minor tactical
problems with the capability to build a system. The skills and knowledge
required to build complex systems are fundamentally different in nature. In the
internet age there is an instant gratification ethic that feeds a belief that we
can be successful simply by searching and applying canned answers to problems.
Now we see that architecture is emerging as the fundamental limiter to quality.

Never before has there been a greater need for software engineers to master the
fundamentals of engineering. As tactical learning becomes universally easy,
strategic learning is becoming a critical success factor. Anyone can build an
application, but will it stand the test of time? These are issues that rest on
the quality of the design decisions.


### Sustainable Innovation

Most organizations claim to value innovation but the truth is that innovation
comes at a price. Innovation can only occur through investing in learning
because technology moves forward at an incredible pace. New skills are the
fuel for innovation. If the staff stops learning, the innovation engine is
running on borrowed time and old technology. Old technologies are often still
being used to build new products because the belief is that it is _safe_, only
because it is what we already know.

Learning is the fuel for innovation. Invest in learning and you are investing in
new products. The typical engineer should spend about 20% of their time
exploring some new technology. This should be done in the context of the product
design rather than as a vague desire to discover. The type of learning that we
need most is tactical and focused on acquiring skill for using critical
technology. Learning must benefit the team and not just the individual.


### Two Bodies of Knowledge

There are two types of knowledge that engineers possess and make them so
valuable to the organization. The first body of knowledge deals with general
principles and practices of engineering. This understanding takes years to build
but it also has a long half-life. For the rest of this discussion we will just
refer to this as *engineering skill*.

The second type of knowledge is about familiarity with a given technology. The
understanding of how to use a specific framework, language, design pattern,
programming hack, or database is just a catalog of tricks. This type of
knowledge is easy to gain but has an exceedingly short half-life.

When assessing skills and building a team, companies should balance these two
different bodies of knowledge. The long-term capabilities of your team are
limited primarily by the engineering knowledge of its members. Technology
understanding will allow you to produce results in the short term. Companies
tend to overvalue either the short-term or long-term skills. This is often tied
to the underlying beliefs about the necessary components for success.

Every team needs to produce results immediately _and_ well into the future. So
seek to build a team that has the proper balance between veteran developers and
new graduates. They each bring something different to your team and both are
essential.


## The 50 Tricks Philosophy

With a sound engineering foundation it is easy to add new technology skills. A
competent programmer can train themselves on a new technology in a couple of
days and be productive in a month. Gaining knowledge about a new technology is
just a matter of learning the top 50 Tricks that are required to be successful
at applying the technology. Each trick is a series of steps that are required
to implement a small scale tactical solution using the technology. A trick can
be fully learned in a day and applied in an hour once the trick has been learned.

Age and experience affect how we see the process of learning. Older developers
tend to believe that the engineering knowledge they already have is the key
asset. Some old engineers latch onto a technology and choose to ride it for the
remainder of their career. They become increasingly specialized in their
expertise and committed to it. This may limit their effectiveness and value to
the organization, simply because they will resist new tools and process. This
lack of growth often limits their role in the project.

On the other hand, young engineers overvalue their familiarity of the newest
technologies. Knowing 50 Tricks will allow you to build a small application, but
doesn't prepare you to deliver an enterprise-level application that will run for
the next ten years. It certainly doesn't give you the skills that you need to
leverage legacy code into a new system. This type of knowledge is only built
with many years of experience.

Young engineers have grown up in the age of Agile Software and Nike (just do it)
notions of speed. So, do we want rapid or sustainable systems? The answer is,
yes. Don't undervalue the deep thinkers or the rapid developers. Every
organization needs a combination of "Do it right" and "Get 'er done"
philosophies. If a team tilts in one direction it will fail.


### Focus on Learning, Not Training

Training is about pushing information. It focuses on what you give to employees.
This covers everything from mandatory corporate training to in-depth technical
classes. This type of training is needed but insufficient to make your
organization a leader in software development.

Learning is about pulling information. It focuses on what employees do for
themselves. Providing a healthy culture that promotes learning can energize
engineers to continue learning and developing. This is the kind of culture that
will turn your organization into a powerhouse of innovation.

Focus on practical application. Many academic institutions struggle in this
area. Much of the information is either theoretical or outdated. Make sure that
people apply the knowledge as soon as they learn it. Make the learning have an
immediate benefit to the individual as well as to the larger team.  

Look for demonstrations of mastery. A skill isn't really useful until you can
show it off. Have each person demonstrate the newly mastered skill to other team
members or host a seminar to teach the skill to others. Celebrate each success.

Each person should acquire some new skill each month. If a year goes by without
any new skills being demonstrated it is possible that learning has stopped
altogether. I've been in some organizations that absolutely stifled learning.
They viewed learning as a self-indulgent luxury that they were unwilling to
waste money on. You get what you pay for and learning can produce a huge ROI if
done correctly.


### Create a Catalog of Tricks for Each Technology

In order to be competent at any given technology you must learn at least fifty
tricks. Why not build a catalog right from the start for the top fifty things
that you need to do? This provides a great way to structure the learning
experience. A trick is a specific way to solve one small problem. There may be
many other alternatives, but to start with, we only need one way to get the
desired result.

A trick may involve a few lines of code or a shell command to get the desired
outcome. A trick is a standard solution to a common problem. It can be easily
documented in a single page of text. Use the template of *Problem*,*Solution*,
*Discussion* to document a trick. Include the code in the Solution section.
Describe the known limitations and implementation tips in the Discussion
section.

A catalog of tricks is more like a cookbook than a tutorial. A cookbook shows
recipes and is very specific. It gets you to an outcome when you don't have
a full understanding of what you are doing. A tutorial tries to build your 
conceptual understanding of the topic. Learning a technology is best done
by creating a tactical understanding first and then filling it in with a 
better conceptual understanding later.

The catalog of tricks is a great way to bring others up to speed quickly. For
example, imagine that your team needs to learn Python. One team member could
build a "50 Tricks in Python" catalog that everyone else could use to get them
started. By selecting the most important things to learn, developers could be
productive far before they develop a full understanding. The code snippets and
working example code allow them to mimic the solutions provided.


### Each Person is Unique and Learns in Different Ways

There are now many excellent opportunities for learning. Encourage each employee
to find the ones that are most effective for them.

* Tutorials and technology books
* Mentoring and teaching
* Training classes
* Sample projects
* Pair programming and code reviews

Ask each person to produce and review a written plan for the skills they
acquired last month and the new ones they wish to acquire. This one act of
accountability will produce great results. Most people want to learn, they are
simply waiting for permission. This acknowledges that learning is a worthwhile
investment. It recognizes the effort that the person is making to develop new
skills.


### Learning and Promotion

Learning is a core competency for engineers. An engineer that can learn is far
more valuable than an engineer that already has the knowledge you need now.
Tactical knowledge is so easy to obtain that we should recruit people for their
engineering skills and then train them in the 50 Tricks they need.

In a healthy team learning will be a natural response to job demands. People
want to grow, they just need a healthy environment. If no growth is happening
this may be a early warning sign of danger. Is the individual struggling or is
the problem larger than that? A history of continual learning should be a
requirement for promotion or for giving new opportunities.

Each person has an effect on the team. Look for individuals that are drawing the
team into deeper levels of understanding. Where do you see team leadership
emerging? Recognize these people for the important role they are playing within
the team.


## Skill Mapping

How can we effectively manage the skills that are required for our projects? We
need a model for matching the required skills to the current set of skills
within the team. Next we need a method for actively managing the skill gap so we
can acquire essential missing skills.

A realistic assessment of desired skills will include both the general
engineering skills and the specific technology skills. Review the overall
project needs and ask what skills are critically needed. Identify the skills
that have been available on similar projects and ask if your project is in need
of those. This may be different than how your team is currently staffed. It may
point out a gap that needs to be filled.


### Dreyfus Model for Learning New Skills

Any given skill will have different levels of proficiency. The Dreyfus Scale
gives us a mental model for how we acquire new skills. It has five different
phases that each have some characteristic attributes.

*Novice*

* Doesn't know much about the subject
* May be familiar with high-level concepts and key words
* Shouldn't be trusted to accomplish any goal

*Advanced Beginner*

* Basic understanding but needs a simple set of rules to follow
* Can't deal with unexpected situations
* Can succeed at well-defined tasks but needs supervision

*Competent*

* Able to build recipes for others to follow
* Can deliver reliable results and recover from errors
* Treats every situation the same (can't appreciate important differences)

*Proficient*

* Views the complexity of each nuance
* Often good at teaching others
* Can quickly solve all problems that arise
* Treats every situation as unique

*Expert*

* Operates largely by intuition 
* Success without thinking
* Highly-tuned automatic responses

The distribution of a population is a bell curve that is skewed toward the low
end. For assessment purposes we will combine the bottom two and top two
categories. This gives us a simple designation of skill level: Beginner,
Competent, Master. We will use this scale for assessing the specific skills for
our team. Learn more about the Dreyfus scale at
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dreyfus_model_of_skill_acquisition.


### Manage a Map of Skills in Your Organization

What skills do you already have? Building an expertise map of your organization
is a valuable tool. A table can be used to record the name of the skill, level,
and individual.


**Table 14-2 Example Skill Map**


|Skill|Person|Level|
|---|---|---|
|Angular JS|Hilda|Master|
|Django|Hilda|Beginner|
|Post Gres|Hilda|Competent|
|Angular JS|Hilda|Master|
|Django|Bill|Beginner|
|Post Gres|Bill|Beginner|
|Project Management|Bill|Competent|

This type of map gives you a bird's eye view of the skills that exist on your
team. Writing this down makes it very concrete. It can become a point of
discussion and review. Now you can consider the skills that you need. Set
targets to acquire specific skills.

Identify the type of map you would like a year from now. How will you fill the
gap? A year is plenty of time to get the skills you are missing. Having a map
also gives you the ability to request specific individuals to learn the skills
needed in order to best serve the team. Create a plan and review it regularly
with each staff member. Measure the progress and acknowledge growth. Whether you
are working on a development plan for an individual or a team it is important to
celebrate success.

This method also works well for preparing your own personal development plan.
Identify the skills that you consider important to success and define the level
that you currently operate at. Project out where you would like to be a year
from now. Use this to set your personal growth and learning agenda. 


### Reward New Skills

Most people want to learn and it is critical to support this goal. Some
organizations discourage learning to their own detriment. Make learning a worthy
endeavor by acknowledging the effort it takes and the value it creates for your
team.

If someone becomes a master in some skill, recognize them as an expert. This
takes very little effort and creates a lot of momentum for other learning
activities. At the very least, take a few minutes in a staff meeting to
acknowledge the accomplishment. Imagine if everyone on your team had three to
four goals they were actively pursuing.

When a student enrolls in college they expect to spend around 8,000 hours of
effort before they can begin to recoup the investment. This is not the type of
learning we are seeking. Create a continuous path of small learning
opportunities with immediate application. Eight hours of effort should result in
visible improvements. Think small, quick, and constant!


### Building a Skill Map

Managing skills within your organization is a fundamental part of your success.
Make sure that you have all of the necessary skills for your project represented
somewhere on your team. The best way to do this is to be explicit about the
level of expertise required.

The Dreyfus model gives us a great representation of the skill levels. People at
the lower skill levels will overestimate their capability. This makes self-
assessment inherently faulty. It is better to move to ratings that are based on
experience. Skill is created by working with a topic over a period of time and
objectively measuring productivity.

According to Malcolm Gladwell, in his book Outliers, it takes approximately
10,000 hours, over a decade or more, to truly master a difficult life skill.
This is a good yard stick to help us calibrate the *Expert* level in the Dreyfus
model. After ten thousand hours of practice, an intelligent and industrious
person should be a world-class expert in their field of study.

Becoming *Proficient* in a complex subject can be achieved in about a thousand
hours of study. If an engineer spends their time solving problems, a thousand
hours will provide opportunity to examine a thousand different problems in the
subject area. One hundred hours is enough time for a person to become
*Competent* since it exposes a hundred different problems to the learner.

This yields the following algorithm for rating skill.

* Expert - more than 10,000 hours of practice
* Proficient - more than 1,000 hours of practice
* Competent - more than 100 hours of practice
* Beginner - more than 10 hours of practice
* Novice - more than 1 hour of practice

Note that this technique doesn't connect in any way with calendar time. If you
work on a project for five years that used Mongo DB but only spent about fifty
hours thinking about Mongo then you are still a beginner. The relevant issue is
how many hours was your brain processing and practicing on the related topic.
This is what determines your true proficiency.

The easiest way to learn how to build a skill map is to build a skill map for
your own personal expertise. This is easier than building a map for the team.
Once you see how to do it you can extend these ideas to build a skill map for
your entire team. Start by creating a list of the top skills that are important
in your work right now. You may be an expert at something that doesn't apply to
your current work assignment. Only use what is relevant to the job at hand.

Next, create categories for groups of skills. This will help you establish the
most important skills and call to mind things that you might overlook. Your
list might look something like:

* Technology - tools, frameworks, general solutions
* Languages - all of the programming languages that are in top demand
* Engineering - general-purpose problem solving skills and techniques
* Leadership - skill that help the overall project succeed

Now select the most important five to ten skills in each broad category. These
are the skills that you need. Rate the level of experience you currently have
for each specific skill. Create a table of each group of skills and where you
rate on the experience. Following is a typical skill set for web developer.

### Table 14-1 Skill Map

|Skill Type|Expert|Proficient|Competent|
|-----|---|-----|-----|
|**Technology**|Django,Git/Github|Web dev, ASP, |PyCharm, |
|||Angular JS, Docker|AWS, Postgres|
|**Language**|Python, C++, Linux|C#, HTML, CSS, JS|Java, Ruby|
|**Engineering**|Process, Refactoring|Debug, Architecture|CI, |
||Automation, TDD|Patterns, Monitoring|Deployment|
||Knowledge mgmt.|||
|**Leadership**|Planning, Agile|Writing, Business|Marketing|
||Product defin.|Skill mapping,||
|||Team lead ||


## Build a Culture of Learning

A lot of learning takes place when motivated individuals teach themselves, but
there are some things that you can do to help this process along. Some
activities can be done as a natural part of your project work. They act as
powerful group-learning and team-building experiences.

Every project requires about 50 tricks in order to get the job done. Think of
these tricks as design idioms or structural patterns. You should identify the
fifty tricks that are most important to your success. Build a *Catalog of
Tricks*. Have someone own it and everyone contribute to it. Make sure that
everyone can do all the tricks.

The actions that you take have a significant influence on the entire team. 
As a leader (whether you have a title or not) you can either encourage or 
discourage learning within your team.  Committing yourself to the goals of 
constantly building your skills and sharing what you know creates a healthy 
example for others to emulate. Over time this can develop into a stimulating 
environment where people have a true desire to learn and grow together.


### Best Practices for Group Learning

Coding standards are important to allow programmers to understand each other's
code. Create an open environment where anyone can contribute to each part of the
code if needed. Setting up and applying coding style guidelines is an essential
part of this process.

Individual performance standards define the level of skill required to play a
certain role on the project. What tricks must you master to become a front-end
developer? What are the base requirements for a DBA? Some organizations may
even define proficiency tests in order to qualify for a role. Have some
expectations in place but tread lightly.

Complexity standards are important for the quality of your project. What level
of complexity will trigger an automatic refactoring? This is an area that you
should give serious thought to since it will fundamentally limit the leverage
that is possible. If you are pushing for high leverage you must keep the
architecture simple.

Mentoring occurs in many different ways. Sometimes it happens automatically and
other times it is orchestrated. Learning events can sometimes be organized but
ineffective. It is best to find natural connections between people. Connect
those with a desire to learn with others that have a desire to teach. Reward
collaboration and mentoring whenever it occurs.


### Build Experts

One expert is worth five newbies in any given skill. Of course, this varies
between skills. A master DBA may be a beginner at front-end development. Use the
highest skilled workers you have available within their area of greatest
strength.

Experts are cheap for the results they achieve. If you don't have a master in a
particular skill, work to grow a master. It is better to spread the mastery
between team  members. Three masters in three technical areas is far better than
having one person that is a master in all three areas.

Beware of an expert without people skills. One caustic personality is enough
to ruin an entire team. No matter how brilliant the person is, they are a
liability. One bad person can easily consume the productivity of four to five
employees.

Look for leadership because a true master leads. Who is influential with
everyone on the team? That's the leader, even if they don't have the title.
Encourage everyone on the team to learn and share best practices. Leverage comes
as a natural result of having high quality designs with high quality experts
leading the charge. A project like this will attract additional talent. The work
will get done and everyone will enjoy working together. This team will be
respected throughout the organization.


### Learning Scorecard

Learning is a dynamic target so try not to plan too far in advance. This gives
you flexibility to respond to changes as they occur. It may be helpful to think
about multiple planning horizons: Week, Month, Quarter, Year. What skills are
you hoping to build now or at some point in the future?

A review should start with a list of new skills each person has developed.
Celebrate the accomplishment and then ask "what's next?" Build on the past with
an eye to the the future. Maintain an inventory of new skills needed by the
team. Consider the personnel interests of each individual and look for overlap.

Try to track measurable results. This helps you establish ongoing support for
favorable corporate attitudes toward training. Let the scorecard show why
freedom to learn is an investment worth making. Show the business what they are
getting for the money spent.


### Cost and Benefit Analysis

Learning has a huge cost. A familiar task can be easily completed in one hour.
An unfamiliar task requires a day of learning. This accounts for the huge gap
between the top and lowest programmer productivity. It is not that the low
performer is an idiot, but simply that they require learning the new skill
before doing it. The performance gap is entirely situational.

Learning has a huge benefit. Once a skill is acquired it produces a dramatic
increase in productivity. But how does this performance aggregate across a
project?

A typical development iteration requires applying 50 tricks. A knowledgeable
person can complete the job in 50 hours. A newbie will take 50 days (maybe
longer). The take-away lesson is this... Expect a range between one week or two
months based solely on who you ask to do the job. Remember that this remarkable
difference is due the familiarity with the tricks they are required to do. It is
no reflection on the personal quality of the individual. Don't ask a painter to
do plumbing.

A more typical situation is a project where some of the tricks are known and
other tricks must be learned. This project profile looks like the following:

* 50 tricks required
* 40 known tricks = 40 hours 
* 10 unknown tricks = 80 hours
* total project time 120 hours

Please note 20% of the project required 2/3 of the effort. Learning has a cost
that is disproportionately large. Even though we might know most of what is
needed, we spend two-thirds of our time learning. This happens on most
projects so it is worth doing the calculations.


### Balance Learning and Doing

On the first day of a new project, complete the 50 Tricks Exercise. Get everyone
on the team into a room. Make a list of the top 50 Tricks you will need for
your next delivery cycle. Hopefully this is only a few weeks away.

Now go through the list one item at a time. Select the person with the most
expertise with that task. Assign that person a level in regards to that task. Be
realistic here since wishful thinking will taint the results. Remember that an
*Expert* requires ten-thousand  hours of practice. Use the objective scale to
assess skill level. Beware of the tendency for wishful thinking. Here is a
sample of what the results might look like.

Database integration    - Who is our best expert at CRUD?

* Bill - Always wanted to learn SQL; spent a few hours
* Item 42 - Bill - Beginner - 10 hours

Login screen  - Who is our best person at login?

* Cindy - Created 327 login views at last count
* Item 43 - Cindy - Proficient - 1 hour

Proceed through each item until you have an accurate picture of the skills you
are missing. Then estimate the learning cost of filling this gap. Maybe it is
cheaper to borrow an expert from the outside than it is to grow your own
competency within your team. Is this a one-time thing or something you will need
repeatedly?


### Switching Technologies

Switching technologies is hugely expensive, because you must pay for every
engineer to climb a learning curve. Unless you are ready to pay a 10x penalty in
productivity you should stay with the current technology. Switching technologies
must be an enterprise-level strategic decision.

Learning a new technology is a straight-forward task but it requires time. Each
member of a team must relearn how to do tricks that they already knew well in an
old technology. The old tricks are worth little once we switch to a new language
or tool. This learning requires time and you must budget for it. You must budget
time for filling the skill gap. This applies to each trick that is not currently
familiar to the developer that must perform the trick.

When you do decide to switch, you should set up a team to learn all of the
required tricks. It should be their responsibility to teach others what is
required in order to be successful with the new platform. In this way you are
hoping to use a team to leverage the learning and benefit the larger team.

Be careful about projecting performance history for a different technology.
Manager often delude themselves by making assumptions. Most managers
instinctively believe that learning is not that big of a deal - but it is. You
may want to set expectations for the recommended investment of time. Here is
an example:.

* 50% on solving short-term problems on project
* 30% on solving long-term problems and applying new skills on the project
* 20% building skills not applied to the current project

Your future really does depend on learning. Play the long game to build the
future you want. Use a regular review to create a feedback loop. Learning is
either encouraged or thwarted by policies. You get what you reward so invest
selectively for the highest ROI. Provide key resources that people need (time,
money, freedom, guidance) and they will learn.


## Best Practice #14 - _Make learning a top priority by measuring it, planning for it, 
investing in it, and rewarding learning when it happens._


***Problem***<br>
Many companies undervalue learning. The emphasis is placed on achieving
immediate projects goals. This forces engineers to learn on their own time.
While this strategy may appear to work in the short-term it can be disastrous in
the long run. A significant amount of time needs to be invested in learning
for a development team to remain competitive.

Many projects lack the fundamental skills that are needed for successful
completion. Teams are often unaware of missing technical and leadership skills
that are critical to the project. A few people on the team may have many of the
skills and other team members may be underutilized because they lack necessary
skills. A project can't be run effectively unless the skills on a team are
managed properly.

Each team member needs to have a clear picture of their skills and how they can
contribute to the team effort. A map is a great tool for managing the necessary
overall project skills and how each individual contributes to the team.

***Solution***<br>
Use the Dreyfus model to score proficiency levels for each skill. Use the number
of hours as a true indicator of skill level. Build a map for each individual,
the team, and the project needs. Look for gaps where new skills must be learned
and build a plan for acquiring the necessary skills. Assess who is capable of
the highest skill level for the most critical skills.

Skill maps can also be used to manage the ongoing development plan for each team
member. Encourage engineers to invest time in developing new skills and
celebrate the success. Have engineers train each other to accelerate the
learning experience and have people from outside your organization help you
learn faster.


***Next Steps***

* Create a personal skill map.
* Create a skill map for your current project.
* Identify the top 50 Technology Tricks that you need.
* Create a skill map for your team and identify gaps.
* Build a simple plan for skill acquisition.

