# 15 - Planning for Leverage


> "Waiting for perfect is never as smart as making progress."
>
> ~ _Seth Godin_

---

## Flexible Planning

At the start of a software project there is tremendous risk because so little is
known. This is the point in the project where uncertainty is the highest.
Everything is unclear - goals, customer needs, technical solutions, and tools.
This uncertainty undermines our ability to plan and budget.

At this early stage important decisions can have profound consequences on the
success of the overall project. A single mistake can sink the project. The
primary goal is working to eliminate as much risk as possible as quickly as
possible. We must perform experiments that yield fundamental understanding that
can translate into a stable project plan. Planning without understanding is a
path to disaster.

Learning occurs throughout the course of a project. Essential information will
always be missing at the inception of a new project. We can guess and make
assumptions but we need experiments to validate these assumptions. Erik Gries,
in Lean Startup, gives a model for how a startup company can experiment to learn
more about the business it is creating. This also applies to Fortune 500
companies that need to learn about the new business opportunities being pursued.

Leverage is a fundamental part of project planning. Leaving leverage as an
afterthought will drastically reduce the amount of reuse. Only by explicitly
pursuing opportunities to leverage will you be able to maximize the development
productivity. All of this requires a planning method that is very different than
the standard process.


### Big Bang Planning

Traditional software projects begin by documenting the project requirements.
Based on these requirements a rigorous project plan is created for a single
large delivery that is either months or even years away. Let's call this
planning method Big Bang Planning, since it is built around one large payload
built over an extended period of time. We will be advocating a different style
of planning built around the principles of Agile Software Development.

The fatal flaw of big bang planning is that it assumes that the world is a
static place and that we have complete knowledge of the project from the start.
Both of those assumptions are false. It is impossible to comprehend every
element of what the project will entail in part due to an incomplete
understanding, but also because important things will happen throughout the
course of the project.

With big bang planning the changes and additional learning are largely ignored
and produce a great deal of wasted effort. There is no good way to make
adjustments during the project because changes are viewed as compromising
existing commitments. It is important to understand that these commitments were
made prematurely and based on flawed understanding.

Companies that rely on big bang planning typically create an adversarial
relationship between the development staff and the business managers. The
business people ask for the impossible and the dev team fails to deliver. After
a few rounds of this dynamic there is a complete loss of credibility and trust.

Rigid thinking during project planning will always create this dynamic. Key
decisions about customers, technology, product features, and implementation
details need to remain fluid for as long as possible. In programming terms, we
would call this *late binding*. It lets us lock down certain details while
letting us keep the available options open. The more you can do this the more
successful you will be.


### Flexibility Creates Responsiveness

How do we move forward with necessary planning and still remain flexible? Focus
on short-term clarity that enables design decisions. Some assumptions won't yet
be validated and these will block vital decisions. Create simple experiments
that allow you to answer these questions and give you real data for making the
key design decisions.

Some of the things you learn will surprise you. Many of these surprises will
require rethinking your assumed development plan. Be willing to make adjustments
to realign the long-term direction. Don't fail to believe what you just learned;
you will be tempted to reject the findings but they are a clear warning that
your assumptions might lead you down the wrong path.

Monitor all of the new learning that is taking place and changes that are
occurring around you. Frequently this new information will demand a response.
Seek to incorporate the new learning into your existing plans. By adjusting your
plans in small ways as you learn, you can avoid big adjustments later and keep
from losing work.


### New Learning

There are several areas where you can expect to have a large amount of learning.

* Customer needs - It takes a great deal of time to fully appreciate the 
needs of your customer. Expect to spend 25% of your project time when entering
a new product domain.
* Solution requirements - The customer needs must be translated into specific
product features. This must be validated by allowing customers to interact
with early versions of the product.
* Technology tricks - Create simple prototypes to prove out technical tricks
independent of the product code. Doing this early makes the rest of the dev
cycle predictable.
* Implementation hacks - Many specific chunks of code are reusable. Begin
building an inventory of code snippets to draw from during the construction
phase.


### Follow Opportunities

There are many different ways to recycle understanding in a software project. Be
on the lookout for how to take advantage of these opportunities. You may be able
to leverage an entire framework by refactoring existing applications. It may be
possible to evolve a particular design to address needs that are different than
its original setting.

Existing redundancies can indicate opportunities for leverage. Designs or code
components that are similar to one another should be combined into a more
general purpose design. Leverage the work that was previously done to  build a
new design that is stronger and simpler. Now this improved design can be
leveraged in the future. Never miss the chance to simplify something that looks
complex.
    
New solutions may come from sources outside of your team. By remaining flexible
in your planning you will be ready to embrace new components that may solve
problems without having to design them from scratch.

Present the team with a list of key problems that need to be solved. Allow the
opportunity for engineers to mull over the issues. Some solutions will emerge
naturally through subconscious processing rather than a direct project plan.
This only happens if you leave the door open for the possibility.


## Functional Breakdown

Planning that isn't tied directly to the final solution tends to become focused
on the business needs and avoids the feasibility of the actual development. It's
important to merge the business needs and the solution architecture, so planning
should be built upon the architectural design. This emphasizes the development
of the real system, instead of only what the company states it needs. Both of
these pictures are important - but must be kept separate. The planners must work
to close any gap between what the development team can produce and what the
company needs.

A block diagram is a good starting point for estimating the development effort.
The architecture can be used as an inventory of the required development tasks
prior to release of the product. An estimate can be prepared for each subsystem
and then the overall effort is totaled.

You can figure out what development assets are available from previous projects
and use this information to figure out how to apply these assets to the new 
design. The leverage is a result of avoiding work by applying previous solutions
to new problems.


### System Decomposition

Every system can be decomposed into three to five subsystems. This represents
the top level architecture of the system. If there are too many subsystems it
may mean that the system should be re-leveled to create fewer top level
components.

Another level of architecture can be created by breaking down each of the 
top level components to reveal the details. Starting with a good architecture 
that covers two levels of detail makes it easy to make detailed estimates
of the development effort.

A simple and clean model of the architecture also reinforces the overall
design for each of the engineers. Unnecessary details are obscured to focus on
the large interactions within the system. A great design should be able to be
drawn on a napkin by any member of the development team.

A clean top-level design will also help you identify critical interfaces.
Everyone can see the overall data flow within the system and get a quick idea of
where the different data elements live.  A system has a natural tendency to
to disintegrate over time. This results from each part of the system being
developed independently. You must maintain the system integration throughout
development to avoid a costly "big bang" integration.


### Building Blocks for Leverage

The block diagram composed of approximately twenty components provides the
backbone for our estimation. Each component represents some portion of the final
system that will be delivered. This will require some amount of work to be done.

Some of this work is similar to what was done on previous generations of
products. Other work will need to be done from scratch. The similarities with
other products gives us a chance to recycle our understanding to build the new
solution. Identify the opportunities for the level of reuse for each of the
components.

Interfaces regulate component interactions. Well-defined interfaces amplify the
level of reuse that is possible. Strong interfaces make it easy to encapsulate
the data for the components, which lengthens the useful lifespan of the
component. Creating new solutions that use these components is often the
highest form of leverage that is possible.

Each component has a life cycle. It will need to be defined, designed,
implemented, and tested. Once again, you can look at each subsystem and see
which of these tasks is mostly complete and which ones need a large amount of
work.


### Quantify Desired Leverage

The effort estimation can be done one subsystem at a time. For each of the
twenty building blocks you will decide on the assets to leverage and how much
work is required to finish that subsystem. This should include all of the life
cycle aspects required to bring it to completion.

Create an estimate for remaining work to be built on the existing assets. There
may only be minor changes that are required to make it ready for the new system.
Or, in other cases, it may require implementing a component completely from
scratch.

Build all of this information into a map. Create a table that captures the
define, design, code, and test effort for each component. Estimate the hours of
development effort needed for each part of the work. This is the beginning
estimate for your project.


### Levels of Leverage

Leverage is not a black and white decision that happens at one time. There are
many different assets that might be reused in various ways. The question is
never, "Should we leverage?", but rather, "How will we leverage?". Leverage can
planned on a module-by-module basis. A complete redesign of a component still
allows a small degree of leverage.

Understand the different levels so that you can estimate the amount of reuse
that you expect to achieve. For this planning exercise, we will equate amount of
leverage with the cost saving to the budget. For example a component that  cost
100 hours to build with a 30% leverage should cost 70 hours.

|Leverage Type|Description|Savings|
|-------------|-----------|-------|
| engineering leverage|Use new tech to solve new problem |10%|
| problem leverage|Use new tech to solve old problems |30%|
| design leverage|Use existing designs to rewrite code |50%|
| code leverage|Use existing code with modification |70%|
| code reuse|Use existing code in a new context |80%|
| maintenance leverage|Fix bugs and enhance |90%|


## Tracking Your Progress

Now we are ready to begin tracking the actual progress during development. Start
with the initial estimate that is based on the architecture and the leverage you
expect to achieve. Throughout the project we will be updating the actual
progress made and updating the estimates for the remaining work.

People naturally make a connection between the effort that is remaining and the
calendar time remaining. This assumes a linear progression that is predictable
and can lead to serious misunderstandings if a gap is allowed to grow between
actual performance and estimated performance. 

The calendar time remaining is based on the velocity of the work that the team
is able to achieve. If the team is consistently delivering less than the
projections indicate, you should enlarge the estimates for all of the remaining
work. Maintain consistency between effort and calendar to prevent
misunderstandings.

Create a spreadsheet to track progress. For each component record the actual
effort that has already been invested and the remaining effort. Update the
remaining effort to reflect all of your current knowledge. Now you can sum both
the total effort invested and the remaining effort. This gives a very reliable
indication of when the product will actually ship.

Reconcile the current plan with reality weekly. Any change in the schedule
should be the result of actual learning that has occurred. This learning will
typically be reflected in small changes throughout the course of the project.
Large changes should only happen when something dramatic has been learned.


### Progress by Implementation Level

Building a new system typically proceeds in layers of development. The first
step is to get all of the core functionality working.  Then the different types
of errors are handled.  It is much easier to get the happy path working first
before considering all of the errors that may occur.  Trying to address errors
too early in the design of each component can result in a more complex design.

I would estimate that about half of the implementation effort goes into 
addressing issues related to error handling.  So this gives you a way to track
your progress through each feature.  When you have implemented a solid handling
of the desired functionality then you are really about half done with the 
finished feature. You can use this to estimate the remaining work throughout
your project.  This is another area that you will want to calibrate to match 
your own development practices.


### Progress by Component

Update the progress of each component on the block diagram weekly. Record the
effort invested and project the trajectory based on updated knowledge. Did the
job just get smaller due to a new simplification or did it grow due to a new
requirement that was discovered?

Focus on remaining work rather than who is to blame for not seeing the issues
earlier. Hold your current estimate loosely. Remember that each week you will
learn something that will alter the estimated release date. The progress
spreadsheet should show a count down to release. The remaining workload should
be dispatched in a linear fashion. Any blips should be due to new knowledge
that is acquired, not variations in productivity.

Adjust estimates weekly to keep the changes small. This will make the project
remarkably predictable and will build credibility and trust throughout the
organization. It allows you to demonstrate that you deliver on your commitments.


### Calculate Work Remaining

The entire estimation tool only works if you give it good data. Putting in
initial predictions that are too optimistic, or refusing to change the estimates
will ruin the usefulness of the results. Honesty is required to keep the actual
progress aligned with expectations.

If you are in an organization that doesn't tolerate changes in estimates then
don't ever publish the component estimates. Conduct business conversations based
on estimates that are about double of the bottoms-up estimations. This outer
estimate should be achievable over the course of the project.

Give the progress high visibility within the development team. Promoting
awareness of how each person's contribution affects the overall effort will
foster a degree of accountability and increases the desire to win.

Update the progress tracker with new info. Review and revise each of the twenty
primary building blocks weekly. Most of the time very few components will
change. Only those where active development is occurring should see significant
change. This review will often take less than an hour and can be a great part of
a team meeting.


### Measure Velocity Weekly

Velocity is the amount of work that is done by the team over a week. This should
match the development team's actual effort. A five-person team can do about 150
hours in a week but not 600 hours. The estimates for future hours serve as
place holders until real measurements replace them. For example, we thought it
would take 200 hours to build a component that ended up requiring 150. The
amount that should be recorded as effort is 150, not 200.

Time remaining should be adjusted based on the actual rate at which things are
done. If we consistently run two times too optimistic (or pessimistic) then this
should be factored into all future estimates. It does no good to try and tilt
the scale. The truth is best digested in small doses.

It is critical that the time scale used for future estimates is consistent with
the scale used to track actual investment. Whether you use only engineering time
(removing meetings, etc.) or total time spent by the team, it doesn't matter as
long as you make the past match the future. This also applies to the units used
to estimate tasks. Milli-fortnights (for example) will work as units of time if
you use it consistently throughout your plan.

Change estimates that are clearly wrong, no matter how fond you are of the first
estimate. A choice to add or remove features can have a large impact on the work
remaining and these changes should be factored in as quickly as possible. Then
everyone can see the impact that the change will have on the project
immediately. The goal is to maintain a consistent view of the estimated
completion for the current plan. As the plan changes it is necessary to update
the information and project the new end date.


## Controlling Scope

Most groups consider estimation to be important in creating predictability
within the project. It is good to be able to measure when a project will be done
but it is far better to control when it will be done. Project managers often
expect that they must have a certain amount of functionality by a certain date
so the discussions center around whether the dev team will be able to do the
job.

This sacrifices an important degree of freedom in the planning. The scope of
work to be done can, and must, be controlled. There is no one correct answer for
functionality. Constant evaluation of how to get the largest ROI for the project
is essential. Controlling scope is the most important leverage that you have in
planning. If you must have certain features sooner then figure out the scope
that will give you what you want.

Business planning is separate from technical planning. The project planning
process can often degenerate into adversarial interactions between the business
planners and the technical planners. This is very counterproductive and harmful
to the project. It creates a win/lose scenario that blocks the kinds of trade-
offs that are essential for the success of the development.


### Tracking Over Estimation

The most important step in improving the overall planning process is to
emphasize actual progress made over future work that must be done. Use the past
history to validate the future plan or change it. Estimation assumes a fixed
deliverable - this is almost never the case.  Instead, consider alternative
goals that can be completed rapidly.

Evaluating other goals will reveal the true priorities of the organization. This
will promote healthy discussions that engage all of the parties in useful
collaboration. It will close the expectation gap by giving everyone the same
picture about the choices that must be made. In essence, a software project is
simply a massive exercise in problem solving. More people contributing to the
solutions will improve the ultimate outcome.

Recording progress weekly and factoring in new learning will revolutionize the
way your team operates. If developers know that any work completed by Friday
afternoon will be viewed by the entire organization then they will push for
closure. This is only natural and doesn't take any extra effort. Just make the
goals for success clear and people will set them as personal targets.


### Embrace Reality

Wishful thinking and unfounded optimism can't persist in a data-driven
environment. People are forced to accept _what is_ rather than _the way they
wish it to be_. I have seen this transformation occur numerous times throughout
my career. Teams steeped in years of dysfunctional interaction can be turned
around in a few months as trust is built throughout the organization.

This could happen in your organization. You don't need an official mandate or
title to begin tracking progress. Once you begin presenting graphs showing real
progress that drives real planning it will attract attention. No manager could
ignore the informative gathering of data that brings clarity to the project.

Each week you should maintain the list of work that is fully complete and update
the time required to do the work. Then update the list of tasks still remaining
prior to releasing the product. Find and add all new tasks to the list. Estimate
the amount of effort required to complete the remaining tasks based on the
team's past history.

Understand the impact of changes that are occurring within your project. Are you
happy with the changes that occurred this week? Is everyone aware of the impact
of decisions related to scope?  If anyone would be shocked or disappointed there
is room for improvement in the planning process. Calculate the new release date
based on everything that you know now.


### Control the Scope

Having clear product goals and finish lines is the most important aspect of
project planning. Without them the business and technical people end up making
trade-offs that are inconsistent. Lack of clarity results in confusion and
conflict throughout the organization. Clear goals will guide everyone as you
make adjustments to the product scope. You can easily reject or postpone
features that aren't required in order to complete the highest priority goals of
the project.

You must also believe the progress tracking data and corresponding estimations.
If you build a tracking system but don't believe what it is telling you, the
opportunity to take timely actions is lost. Having data is only valuable when
you are willing to act on it.

Evaluate the previous changes that were made to the project plan. Did they have
the result that you expected? If not, why not? How can you make changes that are
more effective?


### Use Learning to Update Estimated Completion

Everything you do on a project deepens your understanding. Integrate this
learning back into the project plans. Each week you should become better
equipped to overcome the challenges. As the project proceeds the surprises
should be smaller. Construct experiments to answer questions of technical and
business feasibility as early as possible. Don't save big risks for late in the
project.

By halfway through the project your scheduled release should stabilize. Large
surprises indicate that you didn't address a key risk early enough. Learn from
this experience by making decisions about how you will handle this in the
future.

Build new models of leverage as the understanding grows. Find ways to get more
done with less effort. Perhaps you can create a framework that will reduce your
effort on the next project or merge two products into one? Refine the planning
process with each development cycle. Engage the engineers and business partners
in a collaboration about how to deliver more functionality to the market more
rapidly.


## Best Practice #15 - _Adjust plans throughout development to capitalize on new learning and track progress weekly._


***Problem***<br>
Planning software projects is frequently ineffective when it comes to managing
the unknown risks. Most projects start with planning that is fundamentally
flawed by making early commitments that are rigidly followed throughout the
course of the project. This can have a catastrophic impact on the project
because problems will only be revealed at the end of the project when effective
action is the most expensive.

The astounding failure rate in the software industry indicates that most
companies follow a similar course regarding project planning. We need a model of
planning that has the following attributes:

* Reliable prediction of release date
* Highlights key technical risks so that they can be addressed early
* Robust tracking throughout the course of the project
* Lightweight to oversee and use
* Encourages collaboration between business and engineering staff
* Allow control of scope during the project
* Highly visible progress
* Progress is based on actual product architecture

***Solution***<br>
Create a functional breakdown of the product architecture. Estimate the effort
that is required to complete each of the twenty most important components and
other critical engineering tasks. Track the progress of completed work weekly.
Record actual effort of work done and estimate the work remaining. Then post the
results to align the work and demonstrate progress.

Each week a release date is calculated from the progress. An analysis of what
new things have been learned is applied to the project plan and any required
adjustments are made to meet the overall business goals. Small adjustments are
made to the project plan on a weekly basis to prevent big surprises at the end
and to integrate learning.

***Next Steps***

* Create a high-level system partitioning with two levels of detail.
* For each of the top twenty components, decide on which assets can be leveraged.
* Estimate the engineering effort required to complete each component.
* Build a spreadsheet for tracking progress with a table tracking "component", "done", and "remaining".
* Update information weekly.
* Decide on changes needed to meet business goals.
* Keep a log of what was learned about planning the project.

