# 8 - Release Cycles


> "To successfully implement continuous delivery, you need to change the 
> culture of how an entire organization views software development efforts."
>
> ~ _Tommy Tynja_

---

Deciding when, what, and how to release the software is one of the most
significant decisions that can be made on a project. Waiting too long will
clearly hurt the business and lose customers. Releasing too early can also cause
disaster for the project. There is clearly a sweet spot for when to release
software.

What is the rationale for release? Do we just release the code because a date
goes by and our shareholders are restless, or is there a better way to choose
the introduction date? There are two major factors embedded in the software
itself that drive this decision: functionality, and quality. The features
must be at an acceptable level to meet the market demand or it makes no sense
to release the product. Likewise, the quality must be above some level that is
acceptable. When both of these goals have crossed a threshold it is time to
release and any further delay will hurt the business.

Short release cycles will validate the next round of requirements using real
customer feedback on new features - and you get fast turnaround on new
requirements. Often the initial guess at requirements aren't what is actually
needed in the product. Iterating on the implementation is the fastest way to
get closure on the requirements. This must be balanced with the ability of
customers to embrace the new features and give strong feedback. Rolling too
often can frustrate your customers so it is important to minimize the number
of releases that are in _simultaneous use_.


## Controlling Scope

Unbounded scope on a project can spell disaster. The project scope is set by
the breadth and depth of the problems to be solved. The feature set can be
minimal or large and each feature can be simple or glorious. Larger scope
means larger complexity in the resulting solution. If you solve lots of
problems and create sophisticated solutions for each one, the project will
grow in size. Complexity is non-linear in its impact. Doubling the scope will
cause the required effort to double and sometimes the impact is far more.
Scope, by nature, is unbounded because we can imagine many problems that might
need to be solved.


### Leading Cause of Late Projects

Scope creep is a significant struggle in software development. One more
feature here and one better solution there adds up rapidly. Unless a budget is
set and ruthlessly adhered to the project will inflate. No single factor has
sunk more projects than trying to solve too many problems.

Each feature that is added must justify its worth. Every feature that doesn't
add real value to the customer should be eliminated. This is half of the
equation. The other half is that every feature planned is matched with a
reasonable level of engineering. A project that is trying to build a million
dollar system for a hundred thousand dollars will never leave the launch pad.
Features must be carefully prioritized and be realistic relative to the
investment.


### Cycle of Increasing Scope

A long project cycle begs for a huge scope to cover the investment. If you
believe that it takes ten engineers a year to write your web application you
are planning to invest 20,000 hours in the project with a huge budget. There
better be a giant payoff at the end of this project!

Because we can imagine a glorious system that will justify a huge effort we
scope the project to be the greatest thing that we can imagine. A list of
requirements is published that is twice what the team can actually produce.
After several rounds of hostile negotiations between Marketing and R&D the
project is reduced in scope to 150% of what the team can handle.

Act three of the play involves the developers actually building the huge
feature list and discovering that the stated requirements were a small
fraction of what was actually needed. This project will inevitably slip by
more than 50% of its schedule. This results in both a functional and quality
shortfall with a matching budget overrun. Unfortunately, this scenario happens
every day throughout the software industry.

To meet this crazy schedule:

* development is rushed
* architecture is lax or abandoned
* the team loses track of exactly what is being built
* no one has the Big Picture of the project, even though everyone is committed to it.


### Unreasonable Expectations

The above scenario is far from inevitable. In fact, it is completely avoidable.
The fundamental problem is there is no feedback to force an alignment of what is
desired with what is possible. In this void, unreasonable expectations flourish.
It is time to change the conversation entirely. The scope must be based on a
calculation rather than a vague hope or wish.

The functionality and schedule must be posed as a question rather than assuming
a fixed answer. Otherwise, projects end in a death march because the project
release is over-constrained. A very different approach is required in order to
produce better results.

At the beginning of a project, management typically believes that all of the
product requirements are thoroughly understood. In reality, about 50% of
requirements can be articulated up front and the rest must be discovered over
the course of the project. This means that half of all problems that must be
solved are not even known at the inception of the project. Often management
starts by setting the end date, the core functionality of the system, and the
staffing for the project. Given these constraints the developers struggle to
produce the best possible plan to meet the requirements. The only alternative
is to control scope throughout the entire project life cycle. It can't be
assigned by the stakeholders at the beginning without jeopardizing the
project's success.


### Learning from History

Look at your past projects. How close did you get to hitting the dates and
feature set developed in the initial plan? Most projects disappoint their
stakeholders. History will repeat itself unless your organization can learn
and grow. This is where best practices in leverage are truly powerful. They
can free you from this frustrating cycle.


### Product Backlog and Burn Down Graph

Here's a few techniques that, if consistently applied, will put you on a path to
never miss another deadline. Start by making a list of all the high level
features that your project needs to implement. Work on it until you have around
fifty different features listed. Now prioritize the features in the list by
ranking every feature relative to the rest.

Now drop the ten lowest priority features. Does your project still make sense?
If customers can get the primary value then it probably does. Now lose the
next ten. Does your product work with only 30 features? If so, this is your minimum
viable product. It must be viable and it must be minimal.

It is critical to manage the feature list as a single list. A common mistake is
to negotiate features with independent stakeholders, but doing so is signing up
to fight a losing battle. It is imperative that the stakeholders be managed as a
single entity. Then the whole debate comes down to "what are you willing to pay
for"?

As you implement the feature set, calculate your velocity. How fast are you
moving through the list? If it takes you a month to knock off 2 of 30 items you
can project that it will take you 15 months to finish (of course, the relative
weight of each item needs to be normalized). Reconcile your desired rate with
the actual rate of progress to ensure that you get to the finish line in time.
If you are in trouble you must decrease scope or increase resources while there
is still time to do so.


## Managing Quality

You cannot, or should not, leverage work products that have poor quality.
Cutting corners and taking shortcuts creates technical debt that will cost you
much more later. Poor quality can have an exponential effect if reused. As you
progress toward release make sure that you pay down all of the technical debt.
A stream of low cost releases can only be achieved by a continuous investment
in quality. Taking any path that sacrifices quality will ultimately lengthen
the schedule of the current and future projects.


### Service Level Agreements

We typically set up Service Level Agreements to define the specific terms of
software services we use outside our organization. They define the expectations
for reliability and performance. They also specify what happens when things
break down and who is responsible. Clarifying expectations in writing can
increase the commitment to the shared goals.

A good agreement makes for good neighbors. If an SLA is a good idea between
companies it may also be useful within a company. The internal agreement could
define the terms and conditions related to how software is released into
production. It could reference the specific numeric criteria for release and the
testing protocols that must be in place. It could also outline the scenarios for
promotions from staging to production and rollback if disaster strikes. This
type of SLA can be the backbone of a release plan for operations. The day may
come when this thinking will save you a lot of pain.


### Quality Goals and Release Criteria

When is software ready for release? A rigorous but lightweight process is
necessary to green light a move of code into production. Our release criteria
provides a checklist that can verify we have taken all of the steps to prepare
the software and release infrastructure.

Customize this criteria to your organization's needs so it matches your business
context. Here is a sample checklist to get you started:

* All defects resolved
* All tests pass
* User acceptance tests pass
* Stress tests pass
* Rollback tests pass
* 95% test coverage
* All features implemented
* No modules have complexity > 1000
* Developer review and sign off
* Operations review and sign off
* Review of all deferred defects
* All servers built


### Avoiding Service Disruption

When things go bad during an attempted release it can seriously undermine trust
within the organization. The release criteria give us a first level of defense
against bad releases but there are other things that should be in place as
well.

There should be different types of server environments available with clear
roles. This protects against accidental deployment or any other form of
disruption within operations. Developers need to use servers that are completely
outside of live operations. Test environment servers should be used to deploy
all of the code and perform all of the automated tests. It may also be useful to
do manual testing on the test servers. For the maximum amount of leverage, the
test servers should be as similar to the production environment as possible.

Staging servers should be almost identical to the production servers. This
provides the opportunity to do one final test before exposing our customers to
the new software. Sometimes it a good idea to add in logic that detects what
class of server the software is executing on in order to prevent certain
operations from occurring. For example, imagine a system that sent customer
records to another system. You might want to prevent this from actually
happening unless you are on the production server. On the staging server it
might just accumulate the records in a file. While this sort of test versus
production encoding in the software is often inevitable, it must be minimized
and very carefully questioned and scrutinized.


### Reliability and Robustness

When we plan to release a stream of products rather than a single release we
leverage everything in our operations plan for each successive release. Gone are
the days when it took months to release the software and years for the next
product roll. With continuous delivery, it only takes months to get an initial
release and follow it up within weeks.

This has huge implications for reliability concerns. An expensive release cycle
limits how often software can roll. Therefore, reliability must be phenomenally
good in order to release code continuously. High reliability allows minor
changes to be injected at any time in order to fix critical issues. In this
environment a round of bug fixes can be released within a week.

A good choice is to do a rolling update where the new software is introduced
into some of the servers while the entire system remains running. Some of the
servers are running the new software while others are running the old software.
This is a very effective strategy to avoid any system shutdown and allows us to
carefully avoid certain kinds of changes. Load balancers are used to route the
traffic to the available machines and eventually all machines are running the
new software.

If things begin to unravel the process can be reversed until someone can analyze
what caused the failure. New software must be both backward and forward
compatible. In a more traditional scenario, the system is taken off-line and all
of the servers are updated, then the system is made available again. This has
the advantage of being simpler at the expense of a disruption in service. Your
operations agreement should cover these kinds of policies.

Most systems have state that varies over time. It may be useful to take
snapshots of the running system periodically that could be used to reconstruct
the system in the event of a disaster. This type of a design may be useful but
keep in mind that these systems often have tricky concurrency issues that must
be worked out.


## Shorten Release Cycles

Over time software schedules have gotten progressively shorter. In the 1980s
projects were measured in years and now the typical project can be completed in
a few months. There are many reasons for this. Languages, frameworks, code
generators, and other tools all combine to give the modern programmer an
astounding productivity rate.

Higher productivity results in shorter projects or more frequent releases. To
take advantage of the shorter cycles, projects must be very selective about the
scope of the features that are delivered for each release. A short schedule
doesn't allow for any work that isn't essential. It also requires that the
release process itself be streamlined with automation.

Maximizing leverage is essential to meeting shorter release schedules. There
isn't time in the schedule to create a massive amount of new code and get it
functioning properly. Instead, the project must reuse the bulk of what has
already been created and improve it to adapt to the new requirements. Shorter
project cycles make it is easier to maintain focus on primary objectives which
also improves the management of the project.


### Shorten Your Release Cycle

Traditional projects were measured in years while modern release cycles are in
weeks. But how quickly can we really go? Start by looking at your current
release cycle. How long does it take to go from starting to plan a feature set
until it is being used by real customers? This is the length of your release
cycle and includes the whole development life cycle including the time to
promote the software into production.

Unless you have already been optimizing this, there is a long chain of serial
tasks that culminates in happy customers. There will be many people in your
organization that believe this is the fastest possible speed. In one sense
they are correct, given your current process there is a minimum cycle time you
can achieve. Our goal is to replace the current process with a better one.

It is entirely feasible to get to market in half the time, but you need to
address all of the inefficiencies that are holding you back. To illustrate,
assume that it takes you a year to create a product. This probably means that
you have complex development, project management, and quality assurance
processes in place that require several months of effort to complete a simple
product. If this is your reality, your project must have a massive ROI to make it
worthwhile.

Instead of a one year timeline, cut your schedule to six months. This will
force your team to grapple with the biggest inefficiencies causing delays. It
is very practical to do this size of a change in a single product cycle but
you must rethink your ideas about life cycle and leverage. You will need to
figure out how to leverage more and write less software. This will certainly
lead to smaller scope and a faster release.


### Market Demands Quick Turns

The first dramatic change you will see after you implement these changes is in
time to market. Customers will get new functionality in half the time. This
doesn't have to be at the expense of functionality. The smaller scope and
increased leverage will ensure that all core features are delivered. Usually,
what is pruned off is the extra features that no one cares about anyway. If
you follow this path the customers will receive higher value, more quickly,
from the features. The customer experience will feel like you are giving them
more, not less.

Reducing your time to market is a huge benefit for your stakeholders. Shorter
projects will consume less resources. Parkinson's Law is the adage that "work
expands to fill the time available for its completion".
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parkinson%27s_law).


### Reducing Time to Market Improves Leverage

Leverage results by reusing knowledge gained from solving previous problems
and applying that understanding to solve new problems. A shorter schedule
forces more careful selection of the problems and how we create the solutions.
The shorter schedule demands leverage, which in turn saves time in the
project.

Have you ever added people to a project only to have them slow you down? The new
people do useful work, they just aren't useful enough to offset the cost of
adding people. Removing people, or time, from a project has the opposite effect
- you have less resources so you must reduce scope. A smaller job will be done
far better than the larger one because of better control over scope and focus.

Whatever your current release cycle is, you can probably benefit from cutting it
in half. After you master that level, do it again. By the time you get to one or
two weeks you have eliminated all of the inefficiencies in the release cycle
itself. Then the choice to release on a particular schedule is an operational
one. Operations may only have a need to roll their software every other month.
This shouldn't be an R&D limitation but an operational choice.


### Tools for Continuous Delivery

Achieving short release cycles requires you to rethink the integration. In a
big bang project a lot of development goes on independently and then
occasionally all of the parts are integrated together. This isn't feasible if
you are going for maximum leverage because it creates a lot of extra debug
work to integrate large pieces together into a whole system. Many of the tests
that work for isolated parts will fail at the system level.

Instead, work to keep your code integrated together at all times. Prevent
divergence and build everything incrementally. Only build small pieces in
isolation to prove out design ideas but then integrate them immediately into the
overall product. Write a full battery of tests that use the entire system in its
integrated form. Otherwise, you are not really testing the integration, which is
where many of the problems will lie.

How do you guarantee that the code stays integrated? By building automation into
your core process. Every commit to the version control system should trigger a
full system build and test cycle. With automation, alarms go off if the tests
fail. This requires some initial setup but will save you countless hours trying
to track down how the bad changes got into the code.

Make sure that you test in all of the contexts that your product will function
in. I do most of my work in the Python world which has many different execution
environments that may be important. For example, if I'm building a package that
customers will use it should be tested for Python 2.7, Python 3.4, Pypy,
Anaconda, and other environments. A tool called 'Tox' can create a series of
virtual environments that will build and test in each of these environments.

Other tools can help you automate your integration process. Travis or Drone
can invoke the build and test cycle with each commit. Travis monitors the Tox
output and escalates any failures that are produced from the process. I
heartily recommend that you set up something similar for your specific
environment. Avoid the heartache of having to troubleshoot bad code by
preventing it from happening in the first place.


## Continuous Delivery

The only way to approach continuous delivery is by investing in automating
every aspect of the workflow. Traditional development practices relied heavily
on engineers to perform steps in a particular order to release a new version
of the software. This is an inefficiency that software organizations can no
longer afford.

Count the error-prone steps required by humans to get your software deployed.
Exceptions require special activities to investigate and correct them,
however, the happy path should be very streamlined. You know that the process
is fully optimized when a chain of events can be triggered by a single
command.


### Automation End-to-End

In order to achieve this kind of efficiency we must automate every task that
doesn't require human judgment. Create a chain of events that can be scripted
up to the point that the responsible person can approve further action.

Let's look at a typical workflow for automatic deployment:

Continuous integration

* A build and test occurs automatically before any commit is accepted.
* All versions of the product are built.
* Development code is merged into the correct branch and repository.

Test servers

* Test servers are provisioned to be similar to the production servers.
* New software is deployed and tested on the test servers.
* Test results are reported to the deployment engineer for validation.
* Any mysteries are investigated and repaired.
* Code is promoted to the staging branch and repository.

Staging servers

* Staging servers are provisioned to be almost identical to the production servers.
* New software is deployed and tested on the staging servers.
* Test results are reported to the deployment engineers for validation.
* Any mysteries are investigated and repaired.
* Code is labeled and promoted to the production branch and repository.

Production servers

* New software is deployed and tested on the production servers.
* Test results are reported to the deployment engineers for validation.
* Any mysteries are investigated and repaired.
* Code can be reverted if any problems occur.

Monitor After Release

* Monitoring is done to ensure a smooth introduction.
* The first 24 hours are critical for new deployments.
* Error recovery by roll-back should be practiced so that it is a viable option.

Each of these stages requires some human evaluation but the bulk of the work
should be fully automated. Over time the automation may involve parts of the
evaluation that were previously performed by people.



## Best Practice #8 - _Build for continuous delivery of software and use end-to-end automation._



***Problem***<br>
Long release cycles encourage unbounded scope. Because the project is such a
large investment, the stakeholders continue to add speculative requirements to
justify the cost. This is difficult to resist and results in a lot of
unnecessary features that customers may not even want. The longer the project
runs, the larger the desired scope becomes. This results in a destructive
cycle of feedback that destroys many products and demoralizes teams.

***Solution***<br>
The fastest way to prevent this from happening is to intentionally shorten the
project cycle. This drives careful prioritization of the essential
functionality. The short deadline also requires mastering the disciplines that
are good engineering practices. Once a company learns how to successfully
implement continuous delivery they never go back to a long product cycle.

Short cycles also require fully-automated testing for the integrated system.
Tools can be hooked into the versioning system to automatically build and test
in all of the desired environments. Each commit can trigger a full round of
validation to qualify the recent changes. A failure will trigger a rejection of
the changes and forces the engineer that submitted the code to fix the issues.
Using these practices will make it possible to release code quickly at any time.

***Next Steps***

* Measure your last three projects. How many weeks between releases?
* Plan what you would change to cut the release cycle in half.
* Review any recent slips in expected release dates.
* Assess the effort required (in days) for one production roll. 
* Asses how well-tested is your rolling upgrade and your roll-back plan?

