# 13 - Teamwork

> "Talent wins games, but teamwork and intelligence wins championships."
>
> ~ _Michael Jordan_

---

## Build a Culture of Leverage

Products reflect the organizations that create them. Every organization has a
personality and a culture that will dictate what the human experience of
working there will be like. Some organizations are filled with life, they
inspire each person to bring their best each day. They encourage risk-taking
and exploration even when it may lead to failure. They build teams that freely
collaborate with each other and provide an environment where everyone has the
freedom to succeed. They create products that delight customers and are just
right for the marketplace.

Other organizations focus on heavy control. The leaders at the top make every
decision and the staff is expected to carry out these mandates without
question. There is a lot of talk about loyalty and there are rules for
everything. Fear is pervasive and failures are met with punishment. This is
the old "Command and Control" management style that works somewhat in low-
skill environments but is disastrous in creative companies that live on
innovation and new ideas. An organization running on a strict hierarchical
system will create products that are confusing and difficult to use. A
persistent decline of market share is the inevitable result of the
dysfunctional environment within the company.

Well-run companies will naturally produce high-quality products and it is
possible for a good team within a dysfunctional company to have a history of
repeatable successes if they are isolated enough within their company. Great
products come from great teams. Of all the things that an organization can do
to improve its software development capability, building great teams will
create the largest benefit. Building high-performance teams is essential to
every other aspect of process improvement.


### Culture and Worldview

My father is a cultural anthropologist so I grew up on stories of the strange
customs of people from other cultures. A recurring theme was understanding why
people do things that seem irrational to anyone outside of their culture. The
answers can be found by understanding the worldview and values that drives the
culture. As an adult I discovered that the high tech had its own strange
culture with a strong worldview applied to everything we did. Those that
violated the cultural values were severely punished and some deeds would cause
exile or immediate termination.

While readily adopting this worldview, I remained puzzled over many of the
inconsistencies that were present. In any culture the rules are seldom
recorded, even though they are strictly enforced by everyone in the community.
Some communities intentionally document their worldview to help newcomers
understand and adapt. The HP Way and the Python Code of Conduct both describe
principles that are valued and the expected practices within their
communities. These documents serve as a guide and can help newbies avoid
cultural blunders.

In order to change a culture you must truly understand what drives it. We need
to study the beliefs that drive behavior in order to reverse dysfunction and
affect a positive change in high tech corporate culture.


### Belief Systems

Cultures are driven by a worldview. Individuals aren't aware of their
worldview until someone else opposes it. There are key assumptions that are
naturally embraced and never questioned. An entire worldview is supported by
specific paradigms which each provide a fundamental understanding of the
world. A common mental model allows everyone in the community to be aligned
because they share the same beliefs. The community believes that all _normal
and decent_ people think the same way.

We often choose to be part of a community because we share a large number of
paradigms with them. We resonate with the ideas that are shared and are
repelled by those we don't share. The worldview allows us to readily
distinguish between people like us and outsiders.

Let me illustrate this with two examples. The open source community believes
that sharing is good. It is a self-evident truth that ideas should be readily
exchanged with little thought to collecting money. The Fortune 500 culture
views intellectual property primarily from a security perspective. If sharing
information is viewed as thievery it is difficult to embrace any open sharing
ideals. These two paradigms are directly in opposition with each other. Which
one is right? It will depend on which community you are drawn to. Once you
make this choice, it becomes very difficult to function under another
paradigm.

Another example is related to our view of competition. Some cultures promote
sharing of information and people are rewarded for helping others and
furthering the cause of understanding. In other cultures, people are rewarded
for knowing more than anyone else. Most academic and corporate environments
discourage individuals from helping others because of the perceived loss of
personal advantage. Many corporate environments are based on a forced ranking
of employees doing the same job. Helping someone else might move you from a
62% rating to a 60%. In this type of environment employees may actively
sabotage the success of others in subtle ways, hoping to better their
standing.


### Dysfunctions of a Team

Patrick Lencioni wrote a great book called "The Five Dysfunctions of a Team".
He describes how unattended problems can create a downward spiral into
dysfunction. The problems build on each other until the team becomes unable to
fulfill its mission. Here's his list of team dysfunctions:

1. Absence of Trust
2. Fear of Conflict
3. Lack of Commitment
4. Avoidance of Accountability
5. Inattention to Results

The goal is to build teams that have the characteristics
listed in Lencioni's book:


_Signs of a Healthy Software Team_

1. High level of personal trust.
2. Engage in unfiltered conflict around ideas.
3. Everyone commits to decisions and plans of action.
4. Hold each other accountable for delivering against those plans.
5. Focus on the achievement of collective results.

For deeper understanding of team dynamics, I highly recommend reading "The
Five Dysfunctions of a Team".

### Role of Architect

Now let's build on Patrick Lencioni's ideas to highlight the areas of focus
for building healthy teams within the software development context. The slow
toxin of dysfunction can be reversed by creating an environment that respects
both the task and the people. 

Software architects are responsible for leading the technical development of
the project. A key aspect of this job is to build teams that are capable of
doing the technical work. The architect is positioned within most companies to
have a profound influence on the culture of the team. They are trendsetters -
they set the tone of the cultural norms that are expected within the team. In
a sense, they embody what _normal_ looks like.

Your job is to create an environment where each of these healthy team dynamics
can build on each other: Trust, Courage, Dedication, Focus, Clarity. This
requires a demonstration of true leadership so invest the influence that you
already have to make improvements for the benefit of the entire team. This may
seem like a secondary goal but healthy team dynamics don't happen without
intentional effort and consistently great software only comes from healthy
teams.


## Attributes of Health

Organizations vary dramatically in performance. The most admired company at
this time is probably Google. Their level of productivity is phenomenal and
unequaled. This is a direct result of their culture because they can recruit
the very best, place them within great teams, and then unleash them on complex
problems.

Jim Collins wrote a classic business book entitled "How the Mighty Fall". He
described how successful companies have no guarantee of remaining successful.
A great company can forget to do the very things that made it great in the
first place. When this happens the company will begin a slow and inevitable
downward spiral into dysfunction. If left unchecked, a Fortune 100 company may
close its doors within a few years.

Although you can't address the needs of a whole company, you can bring light
and health to your local team. The Software Architect role requires more than
technical skills, it requires leadership. Consider the task of building your
culture a meta-project that supports all of your projects. Seek to leverage
the culture beyond the scope of a single project. 

There are several areas of culture that determine the amount of leverage that
your projects will have. Each of these areas should be designed to give you
optimal results. Think of each of these areas as a cultural pillar. Together
they provide a high-performance platform for your projects.


### Trust

There's a lot of talk now about trust, and for a very good reason. We live in
a low-trust world. Some have pointed to government and corporate scandals as
the cause but everyone agrees that trust is a scarce commodity everywhere you
look. Stephen M. R. Covey has written two books about trust and begins "Smart
Trust" with a fascinating discussion about the direct correlation between
trust and prosperity at the national level. The higher level of trust within a
society (and the corresponding low level of corruption), the higher the
productivity and prosperity. This dynamic can be seen at every level down to
states, cities, companies, teams, and families.

A high level of personal trust is a basic requirement for success because
without trust everything else is in jeopardy. Lack of trust is the beginning
of the dysfunctional spiral for teams so this is also the place to start when
building a healthy team. Trust is the foundation of collaboration and an
environment where invention is welcomed. Creating an environment of trust will
make all other changes possible and neglecting to actively build trust will
block every other effort.

Some teams are steeped in fear. Managers don't trust the engineers so they
micromanage the smallest details. In return, the engineers don't trust the
managers to look out for their best interests. In this environment no one is
even thinking about true success anymore - they are simply trying not to lose.
There is a significant difference between playing to win and playing not to
lose. Confidence ebbs in this type of toxic environment. When no one trusts
anyone, people spend a great deal of energy assigning blame to others.

On the other hand, when trust is high, people feel empowered. They want to
succeed and they want to make the team succeed. Empowerment restores the
desire to make a contribution. It produces a sense of accountability that
moves each person to do the right thing. If someone is empowered to make a
decision they will work hard to make the right one. Therefore, empowerment is
caused by, and is a sign of, high trust. In his book "Trustology", Richard
Fagerlin wrote "high trust is the currency of greatness".


### Courage to Take Risks

As trust grows so does the courage to take risks. Decisions that may take a
hundred hours in a low trust environment can be made in less than an hour when
everyone trusts each other. Avoiding conflict is a hallmark of low trust.
Without open conversations and working through conflicting ideas within the
team, plans will be weak and lack commitment from the entire team. Trust
creates the courage to act. Without trust there is a lot of energy spent on
trying to anticipate every possible problem. Analysis paralysis is a symptom
of low levels of trust.

Cooperation can grow when people feel secure. They believe that helping others
will benefit everyone. Secure people are friendly and cooperative. Fear causes
people to act with suspicion and hostility. When you find a team producing
great results you can bet that the people on the team are eager to help each
other. Teams that are motivated primarily by competition and self-interest
will inevitably descend into dysfunction. It takes courage to step out and
propose new solutions and try new things. The courage to innovate only occurs
broadly in an environment where individuals feel secure and "safe" to take
risks.

Sharing information is a sign of trust. When people are insecure they view
holding information as holding power. They are reluctant to share what they
know for fear that their power might be diminished. This is disastrous in
software development.

It takes a lot of trust for team members to learn from each other. They must
truly believe that exposing limited understanding to a co-worker will not hurt
their reputation. This can't happen when people are fearful that reaching out
for help might create a negative perception of their technical skills.

Taking ownership of problems also requires trust. Empowerment helps people
embrace the responsibility to find solutions - this takes courage. Trusting a
teammate enough to ask for help can be the boost they need to overcome a
difficult problem. 

To truly foster innovation requires that people feel safe enough to take
risks. In an environment of fear people will focus their energy on protection,
making sure they don't lose. This is entirely different than working to
succeed. Innovation inevitably involves some amount of risk and failure. If
failure is punished your team will be afraid to try new things.


### Dedication to the Team

Champion soccer player Mia Hamm said, "I am a member of a team, and I rely on
the team, I defer to it and sacrifice for it, because the team, not the
individual, is the ultimate champion". Dedication to the team is a natural
response to trusting your co-workers and believing in your team's purpose.
Accountability then increases as each team member commits to the success of
the team.

People have an innate desire for mastery and purpose. As these two desires are
coupled to the team's goals, the individual productivity is dramatically
multiplied. Craftsmanship often gets lost in the rush to market. It is
important for each developer to feel that they are growing in their
understanding of software. Define roles for each individual on your project
that allows them to work on their craft, in the area of their strength, while
producing a result for the team. The most important thing a team can do is
learn, it is foundational to everything else. Encouraging craftsmanship will
help to align everyone with the team vision.

Culture determines the innovative output to a large degree. The most admired
companies in high tech are able to innovate faster than everyone else because
their environment encourages and supports healthy behaviors and the employees
become passionately dedicated to their company's mission. Google grants their
development staff 20% of their time to working on what _they_ think will most
benefit Google. That is a message of empowerment!


### Focus on Problem Solving

The ability to focus on the highest priority problems is a sure sign of health
in a team. During the course of software development there may be thousands of
individual problems to solve. The success of the team requires that the bulk
of the focus be placed on the technical issues and resolving them quickly.

Some organizations become so distracted by non-technical issues that the
product development becomes an afterthought. Bureaucracy and busy work are
frequent sources of distraction. Poor interpersonal dynamics can also suck up
huge amounts of time. Pay attention to the "pain" in this turmoil and work on
team issues before it destroys your project.

A team can maintain focus only if that focus is supported by the rest of the
organization. Building a history of reliable product delivery builds a
reputation in the larger organization which in turn buys breathing space for
the team to focus on building skills and solving problems. When the team isn't
allowed to operate with this degree of autonomy the productivity will suffer.
Trying to regain trust entails a lot of time spent trying to garner management
support through progress meetings and similar events. This distracts from the
real work that must be done and stretches out the schedule.


### Clarity

An empowered and skilled team still needs clear priorities to succeed. Clarity
about the highest priorities will allow your team to excel in their work and
confusion about what the true goals are will undermine the teamwork in your
group.

Leadership matters because leaders set the tone of the environment. They
communicate what is most important and work to gain alignment in purpose
across the entire organization. Leaders define the vision and objectives for
the organization. There is much discussion in management circles about mission
statements but they are only the beginning. A leader needs to communicate not
only what is valuable but how those values affect daily practices.

Convert principles into practices. How will your principles be translated into a
new behavior? If you decide that some documents are a waste of time, then only
write documents that are useful. Or if you believe that requirements only can
be discovered by customers using the product, then build prototypes earlier.
If you believe that complexity is bad, then enforce simplicity standards.


## Building the Desired Culture

Is the focus on culture a waste of time? Is it too "warm and fuzzy" to really
be of importance? The human dimension in an organization is inseparable and
ignored at your own peril. Often it is difficult to persuade the key decision
makers that they need to invest in people - unless they believe that their
survival is at  stake.

Producing high-quality software that meets the current needs is a complex
endeavor and it won't happen with a team that is just logging hours. A
cohesive team that is highly motivated to make the business successful is
absolutely essential.


### Essential Goals

This kind of focused motivation doesn't come from handing out common rewards
and perks in hope of inspiring inventors to produce something of lasting
value. The companies that succeed are the ones that inspire their people to
reach beyond what they are currently doing. How are you inspiring those you
work with? Are there some simple things that you might do to take your team to
the next level?

The ability to reach maximum leverage is based, to a large extent, on the
culture of your organization. Do people feel exploited and undervalued? If so,
you will never get much leverage on any project. An environment that supports
engaged employees will have low turnover as they thrive and grow. A punitive
organization will drive out the best employees, leaving bureaucrats and low-
performing parasites. When the best leave they will take everything they know
about the project with them. You will lose access to their domain knowledge,
their skill with certain technologies, their understanding of how the product
works, their knowledge of the customers and market, their ideas about future
product directions, and their insight into weak areas of the code.

Replacing an engineer on a project can cost the equivalent of 2,000 hours of
effort, or more, to recruit, train, and bring them up to the same level of
productivity. It is hard to imagine a more costly mistake. Avoid waste by
working to keep people fully engaged and eager to contribute to the common
goals.

If a positive corporate culture is so wonderful why do so few companies invest
in their people? It ultimately boils down to a lack of understanding.
Leadership can often lose track of the impact, either positive or negative,
they have on the people that work for them.


### Crafting Your Culture

Culture happens automatically wherever there is a group of people. Culture is
often based on a shared history of events that results in the creation of
rules. "From now on no code will be committed without passing the unit tests.
If you break the build you have to be the build master."

Everyone wants a great culture but it's not easy to create. It requires more
than lip service or instituting Beer n' Pizza Fridays and installing a
foosball table. Crafting a great culture takes months and requires
sophisticated understanding of the politics of power. You can start that
process by assessing the cultural elements you would like to change most.

Few companies invest the level of resources and focus required to build a
positive culture. Some half-hearted attempts to improve the culture can even
make things significantly worse. Many companies conduct "voice of the
workplace" surveys but if there is no commitment from upper management to take
action in response to negative feedback they are better off to just skip the
pointless exercise.

One of the most frustrating experiences in modern life is calling customer
service and waiting on hold for a long time and listening to the message say
over and over that your call is important to them. Over and over again the
customer thinks, "if my call was actually important to them there would be
someone available immediately to talk to me". Saying we value something
without taking action is meaningless and doesn't fool anyone.


### Leverage Team-building Expertise

The good news is there is plenty of opportunity to increase the effectiveness
of your teams by leveraging the knowledge of several decades worth of research
on team dynamics. I've already mentioned several great books on the subject. I
also recommend the books that came out of the Gallup research, "First, Break
All the Rules" and "Now, Discover Your Strengths". 

Investing time and energy into building great teams will not only improve the
team's effectiveness, it will greatly increase your ability to recruit top
talent. Everyone wants to work on a great team but very few people know how to
create one.


### Ink Your Manifesto

Creating a manifesto can be a powerful exercise for a team. It acknowledges
that things are not okay and that we have a responsibility to make them
better. It can provide courage for the hard work that must be done and it
awakens the inner warrior in all of us.

In daily operations, it is the practices that determine our specific actions.
These practices must be anchored in a set of principles so that we choose the
right practices. But the principles alone are not enough guidance for our 
behaviors. The best way to handle this is to have both of them described 
together. The Agile Manifesto (http://www.agilemanifesto.org) is an excellent
example of this in action. They describe both the high-level principles and 
how these translate into specific daily practices.

Gather your team together and talk about the human and technical principles
that should be represented in the team's daily actions. Then create your own
manifesto to capture the things you value most. It can be as simple as a
checklist but your manifesto will define both vision and action.

Writing a manifesto may reveal areas of conflict that must be sorted out with
different team members. This will improve your overall team dynamics by
getting past the veneer of politeness that many teams use to conceal
disagreement.

Once you have a team manifesto, select three concrete actions the team can
take to change how things are currently done and move toward the goals. You
might consider assigning champions to specific goals. Schedule time for the
team to meet quarterly to review progress and make needed changes to the
action plan. The regular review of the team manifesto, current state, and
goals can become part of a continuous improvement cycle that will also help
you integrate new members as they join the team.

As you work through these values and goals, a team identity will emerge. This
is an important part of the process. It builds dedication and clarity that
energizes everyone on the team. Each team member should be able to verbalize
the unique team qualities in a single sentence. "We are the team that _____".



## Best Practice #13 - _Build healthy teams by investing resources, creating a team manifesto, and tracking team goals quarterly._

***Problem***<br>
Building software is dependent on the culture that operates within the company
and its teams. Talented individuals will be hampered in their efforts when
placed in a dysfunctional environment. A company that has a low-trust culture
will be slower to respond to market changes and will create mediocre software
products.

This cycle can be stopped and reversed by understanding the basis of a healthy
culture. A healthy software team has five essential attributes that can be
attained in any organization:

* Trust
* Courage
* Dedication
* Focus
* Clarity

***Solution***<br> 
Start with a commitment to improve the culture within your sphere of
influence. Gather your team and use an assessment tool to gather real data on
the current state of your team. Look for areas of pain and conflict to
identify problems that are caused by fear and lack of trust. Write a manifesto
with your team that describes the team principles and practices. Create an
action plan to move toward the team's functional goals.

***Next Steps***
 
* Read "The Five Dysfunctions of a Team" by Patrick Lencioni
* Take the Team Assessment at the back of Lencioni's book.
* Write a team manifesto of principles and practices.
* Choose three actionable team goals and review them quarterly.


